Photosynthesisnote 1 is a system of biological processes by which photopigment-bearing autotrophic organisms, such as most plants, algae and cyanobacteria, convert light energy — typically from sunlight — into the chemical energy necessary to fuel their metabolism. The term photosynthesis usually refers to oxygenic photosynthesis, a process that releases oxygen as a byproduct of water splitting. Photosynthetic organisms store the converted chemical energy within the bonds of intracellular organi
c compounds (complex compounds containing carbon), typically carbohydrates like sugars (mainly glucose, fructose and sucrose), starches, phytoglycogen and cellulose. When needing to use this stored energy, an organism's cells then metabolize the organic compounds through cellular respiration. Photosynthesis plays a critical role in producing and maintaining the oxygen content of the Earth's atmosphere, and it supplies most of the biological energy necessary for complex life on Earth.2
Some organ
isms also perform anoxygenic photosynthesis, which does not produce oxygen. Some bacteria (e.g. purple bacteria) use bacteriochlorophyll to split hydrogen sulfide as a reductant instead of water, releasing sulfur instead of oxygen, which was a dominant form of photosynthesis in the euxinic Canfield oceans during the Boring Billion.34 Archaea such as Halobacterium also perform a type of non-carbon-fixing anoxygenic photosynthesis, where the simpler photopigment retinal and its microbial rhodopsin
 derivatives are used to absorb green light and produce a proton (hydron) gradient across the cell membrane, and the subsequent ion movement powers transmembrane proton pumps to directly synthesize adenosine triphosphate (ATP), the "energy currency" of cells. Such archaeal photosynthesis might have been the earliest form of photosynthesis that evolved on Earth, as far back as the Paleoarchean, preceding that of cyanobacteria (see Purple Earth hypothesis).5
While the details may differ between sp
ecies, the process always begins when light energy is absorbed by the reaction centers, proteins that contain photosynthetic pigments or chromophores. In plants, these pigments are chlorophylls  held inside chloroplasts, abundant in leaf cells. In cyanobacteria, they are embedded in the plasma membrane. In these light-dependent reactions, some energy is used to strip electrons from suitable substances, such as water, producing oxygen gas. The hydrogen freed by the splitting of water is used in t
he creation of two important molecules that participate in energetic processes: reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) and ATP.
In plants, algae, and cyanobacteria, sugars are synthesized by a subsequent sequence of light-independent reactions called the Calvin cycle. In this process, atmospheric carbon dioxide is incorporated into already existing organic compounds, such as ribulose bisphosphate (RuBP).6 Using the ATP and NADPH produced by the light-dependent reactions, the
 resulting compounds are then reduced and removed to form further carbohydrates, such as glucose. In other bacteria, different mechanisms like the reverse Krebs cycle are used to achieve the same end.
The first photosynthetic organisms probably evolved early in the evolutionary history of life using reducing agents such as hydrogen or hydrogen sulfide, rather than water, as sources of electrons.7 Cyanobacteria appeared later; the excess oxygen they produced contributed directly to the oxygenatio
n of the Earth,8 which rendered the evolution of complex life possible. The average rate of energy captured by global photosynthesis is approximately 130 terawatts,91011 which is about eight times the total power consumption of human civilization.12 Photosynthetic organisms also convert around 100–115 billion tons , of carbon into biomass per year.1314 Photosynthesis was discovered in 1779 by Jan Ingenhousz who showed that plants need light, not just soil and water.
Most photosynthetic organisms
 are photoautotrophs, which means that they are able to synthesize food directly from carbon dioxide and water using energy from light. However, not all organisms use carbon dioxide as a source of carbon atoms to carry out photosynthesis; photoheterotrophs use organic compounds, rather than carbon dioxide, as a source of carbon.2
In plants, algae, and cyanobacteria, photosynthesis releases oxygen. This oxygenic photosynthesis is by far the most common type of photosynthesis used by living organi
sms. Some shade-loving plants (sciophytes) produce such low levels of oxygen during photosynthesis that they use all of it themselves instead of releasing it to the atmosphere.15
Although there are some differences between oxygenic photosynthesis in plants, algae, and cyanobacteria, the overall process is quite similar in these organisms. There are also many varieties of anoxygenic photosynthesis, used mostly by bacteria, which consume carbon dioxide but do not release oxygen or which produce el
emental sulfur instead of molecular oxygen.1617
Carbon dioxide is converted into sugars in a process called carbon fixation; photosynthesis captures energy from sunlight to convert carbon dioxide into carbohydrates. Carbon fixation is an endothermic redox reaction. In general outline, photosynthesis is the opposite of cellular respiration: while photosynthesis is a process of reduction of carbon dioxide to carbohydrates, cellular respiration is the oxidation of carbohydrates or other nutrients t
o carbon dioxide. Nutrients used in cellular respiration include carbohydrates, amino acids and fatty acids. These nutrients are oxidized to produce carbon dioxide and water, and to release chemical energy to drive the organism's metabolism.
Photosynthesis and cellular respiration are distinct processes, as they take place through different sequences of chemical reactions and in different cellular compartments (cellular respiration in mitochondria).1819
The general equation for photosynthesis as
 first proposed by Cornelis van Niel is:20
Since water is used as the electron donor in oxygenic photosynthesis, the equation for this process is:
This equation emphasizes that water is both a reactant in the light-dependent reaction and a product of the light-independent reaction, but canceling n water molecules from each side gives the net equation:
Other processes substitute other compounds (such as arsenite) for water in the electron-supply role; for example some microbes use sunlight to oxi
dize arsenite to arsenate:21 The equation for this reaction is:
Photosynthesis occurs in two stages. In the first stage, light-dependent reactions or light reactions capture the energy of light and use it to make the hydrogen carrier NADPH and the energy-storage molecule ATP. During the second stage, the light-independent reactions use these products to capture and reduce carbon dioxide.
Most organisms that use oxygenic photosynthesis use visible light for the light-dependent reactions, although
 at least three use shortwave infrared or, more specifically, far-red radiation.23
Some organisms employ even more radical variants of photosynthesis. Some archaea use a simpler method that employs a pigment similar to those used for vision in animals. The bacteriorhodopsin changes its configuration in response to sunlight, acting as a proton pump. This produces a proton gradient more directly, which is then converted to chemical energy. The process does not involve carbon dioxide fixation and d
oes not release oxygen, and seems to have evolved separately from the more common types of photosynthesis.24
In photosynthetic bacteria, the proteins that gather light for photosynthesis are embedded in cell membranes. In its simplest form, this involves the membrane surrounding the cell itself.25 However, the membrane may be tightly folded into cylindrical sheets called thylakoids,26 or bunched up into round vesicles called intracytoplasmic membranes.27 These structures can fill most of the int
erior of a cell, giving the membrane a very large surface area and therefore increasing the amount of light that the bacteria can absorb.26
In plants and algae, photosynthesis takes place in organelles called chloroplasts. A typical plant cell contains about 10 to 100 chloroplasts. The chloroplast is enclosed by a membrane. This membrane is composed of a phospholipid inner membrane, a phospholipid outer membrane, and an intermembrane space. Enclosed by the membrane is an aqueous fluid called the
 stroma. Embedded within the stroma are stacks of thylakoids (grana), which are the site of photosynthesis. The thylakoids appear as flattened disks. The thylakoid itself is enclosed by the thylakoid membrane, and within the enclosed volume is a lumen or thylakoid space. Embedded in the thylakoid membrane are integral and peripheral membrane protein complexes of the photosynthetic system.
Plants absorb light primarily using the pigment chlorophyll. The green part of the light spectrum is not abs
orbed but is reflected, which is the reason that most plants have a green color. Besides chlorophyll, plants also use pigments such as carotenes and xanthophylls.28 Algae also use chlorophyll, but various other pigments are present, such as phycocyanin, carotenes, and xanthophylls in green algae, phycoerythrin in red algae (rhodophytes) and fucoxanthin in brown algae and diatoms resulting in a wide variety of colors.
These pigments are embedded in plants and algae in complexes called antenna pro
teins. In such proteins, the pigments are arranged to work together. Such a combination of proteins is also called a light-harvesting complex.29
Although all cells in the green parts of a plant have chloroplasts, the majority of those are found in specially adapted structures called leaves. Certain species adapted to conditions of strong sunlight and aridity, such as many Euphorbia and cactus species, have their main photosynthetic organs in their stems. The cells in the interior tissues of a le
af, called the mesophyll, can contain between 450,000 and 800,000 chloroplasts for every square millimeter of leaf. The surface of the leaf is coated with a water-resistant waxy cuticle that protects the leaf from excessive evaporation of water and decreases the absorption of ultraviolet or blue light to minimize heating. The transparent epidermis layer allows light to pass through to the palisade mesophyll cells where most of the photosynthesis takes place.
In the light-dependent reactions, one
 molecule of the pigment chlorophyll absorbs one photon and loses one electron. This electron is taken up by a modified form of chlorophyll called pheophytin, which passes the electron to a quinone molecule, starting the flow of electrons down an electron transport chain that leads to the ultimate reduction of NADP to NADPH. In addition, this creates a proton gradient (energy gradient) across the chloroplast membrane, which is used by ATP synthase in the synthesis of ATP. The chlorophyll molecul
e ultimately regains the electron it lost when a water molecule is split in a process called photolysis, which releases oxygen.
The overall equation for the light-dependent reactions under the conditions of non-cyclic electron flow in green plants is:30
Not all wavelengths of light can support photosynthesis. The photosynthetic action spectrum depends on the type of accessory pigments present. For example, in green plants, the action spectrum resembles the absorption spectrum for chlorophylls an
d carotenoids with absorption peaks in violet-blue and red light. In red algae, the action spectrum is blue-green light, which allows these algae to use the blue end of the spectrum to grow in the deeper waters that filter out the longer wavelengths (red light) used by above-ground green plants. The non-absorbed part of the light spectrum is what gives photosynthetic organisms their color  and is the least effective for photosynthesis in the respective organisms.
In plants, light-dependent react
ions occur in the thylakoid membranes of the chloroplasts where they drive the synthesis of ATP and NADPH. The light-dependent reactions are of two forms: cyclic and non-cyclic.
In the non-cyclic reaction, the photons are captured in the light-harvesting antenna complexes of photosystem II by chlorophyll and other accessory pigments (see diagram "Z-scheme"). The absorption of a photon by the antenna complex loosens an electron by a process called photoinduced charge separation. The antenna syste
m is at the core of the chlorophyll molecule of the photosystem II reaction center. That loosened electron is taken up by the primary electron-acceptor molecule, pheophytin. As the electrons are shuttled through an electron transport chain , a chemiosmotic potential is generated by pumping proton cations (H+) across the membrane and into the thylakoid space. An ATP synthase enzyme uses that chemiosmotic potential to make ATP during photophosphorylation, whereas NADPH is a product of the terminal
 redox reaction in the Z-scheme. The electron enters a chlorophyll molecule in Photosystem I. There it is further excited by the light absorbed by that photosystem. The electron is then passed along a chain of electron acceptors to which it transfers some of its energy. The energy delivered to the electron acceptors is used to move hydrogen ions across the thylakoid membrane into the lumen. The electron is eventually used to reduce the coenzyme NADP with an H+ to NADPH ; at that point, the path 
of that electron ends.
The cyclic reaction is similar to that of the non-cyclic but differs in that it generates only ATP, and no reduced NADP (NADPH) is created. The cyclic reaction takes place only at photosystem I. Once the electron is displaced from the photosystem, the electron is passed down the electron acceptor molecules and returns to photosystem I, from where it was emitted, hence the name cyclic reaction.
Linear electron transport through a photosystem will leave the reaction center o
f that photosystem oxidized. Elevating another electron will first require re-reduction of the reaction center. The excited electrons lost from the reaction center (P700) of photosystem I are replaced by transfer from plastocyanin, whose electrons come from electron transport through photosystem II. Photosystem II, as the first step of the Z-scheme, requires an external source of electrons to reduce its oxidized chlorophyll a reaction center. The source of electrons for photosynthesis in green p
lants and cyanobacteria is water. Two water molecules are oxidized by the energy of four successive charge-separation reactions of photosystem II to yield a molecule of diatomic oxygen and four hydrogen ions. The electrons yielded are transferred to a redox-active tyrosine residue that is oxidized by the energy of P680+. This resets the ability of P680 to absorb another photon and release another photo-dissociated electron. The oxidation of water is catalyzed in photosystem II by a redox-active 
structure that contains four manganese ions and a calcium ion; this oxygen-evolving complex binds two water molecules and contains the four oxidizing equivalents that are used to drive the water-oxidizing reaction (Kok's S-state diagrams). The hydrogen ions are released in the thylakoid lumen and therefore contribute to the transmembrane chemiosmotic potential that leads to ATP synthesis. Oxygen is a waste product of light-dependent reactions, but the majority of organisms on Earth use oxygen an
d its energy for cellular respiration, including photosynthetic organisms.31
In the light-independent (or "dark") reactions, the enzyme RuBisCO captures CO2 from the atmosphere and, in a process called the Calvin cycle, uses the newly formed NADPH and releases three-carbon sugars, which are later combined to form sucrose and starch. The overall equation for the light-independent reactions in green plants is30128
Carbon fixation produces the three-carbon sugar intermediate, which is then converte
d into the final carbohydrate products. The simple carbon sugars photosynthesis produces are then used to form other organic compounds, such as the building material cellulose, the precursors for lipid and amino acid biosynthesis, or as a fuel in cellular respiration. The latter occurs not only in plants but also in animals when the carbon and energy from plants is passed through a food chain.
The fixation or reduction of carbon dioxide is a process in which carbon dioxide combines with a five-c
arbon sugar, ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate, to yield two molecules of a three-carbon compound, glycerate 3-phosphate, also known as 3-phosphoglycerate. Glycerate 3-phosphate, in the presence of ATP and NADPH produced during the light-dependent stages, is reduced to glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate. This product is also referred to as 3-phosphoglyceraldehyde (PGAL) or, more generically, as triose phosphate. Most (five out of six molecules) of the glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate produced are used to regenerate r
ibulose 1,5-bisphosphate so the process can continue. The triose phosphates not thus "recycled" often condense to form hexose phosphates, which ultimately yield sucrose, starch, and cellulose, as well as glucose and fructose. The sugars produced during carbon metabolism yield carbon skeletons that can be used for other metabolic reactions like the production of amino acids and lipids.
In hot and dry conditions, plants close their stomata to prevent water loss. Under these conditions, CO2 will de
crease and oxygen gas, produced by the light reactions of photosynthesis, will increase, causing an increase of photorespiration by the oxygenase activity of ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase (RuBisCO) and decrease in carbon fixation. Some plants have evolved mechanisms to increase the CO2 concentration in the leaves under these conditions.32
Plants that use the C4 carbon fixation process chemically fix carbon dioxide in the cells of the mesophyll by adding it to the three-carbon m
olecule phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP), a reaction catalyzed by an enzyme called PEP carboxylase, creating the four-carbon organic acid oxaloacetic acid. Oxaloacetic acid or malate synthesized by this process is then translocated to specialized bundle sheath cells where the enzyme RuBisCO and other Calvin cycle enzymes are located, and where CO2 released by decarboxylation of the four-carbon acids is then fixed by RuBisCO activity to the three-carbon 3-phosphoglyceric acids. The physical separation o
f RuBisCO from the oxygen-generating light reactions reduces photorespiration and increases CO2 fixation and, thus, the photosynthetic capacity of the leaf.33 C4 plants can produce more sugar than C3 plants in conditions of high light and temperature. Many important crop plants are C4 plants, including maize, sorghum, sugarcane, and millet. Plants that do not use PEP-carboxylase in carbon fixation are called C3 plants because the primary carboxylation reaction, catalyzed by RuBisCO, produces the
 three-carbon 3-phosphoglyceric acids directly in the Calvin-Benson cycle. Over 90% of plants use C3 carbon fixation, compared to 3% that use C4 carbon fixation;34 however, the evolution of C4 in over sixty plant lineages makes it a striking example of convergent evolution.32 C2 photosynthesis, which involves carbon-concentration by selective breakdown of photorespiratory glycine, is both an evolutionary precursor to C4 and a useful carbon-concentrating mechanism in its own right.35
Xerophytes, 
such as cacti and most succulents, also use PEP carboxylase to capture carbon dioxide in a process called Crassulacean acid metabolism (CAM). In contrast to C4 metabolism, which spatially separates the CO2 fixation to PEP from the Calvin cycle, CAM temporally separates these two processes. CAM plants have a different leaf anatomy from C3 plants, and fix the CO2 at night, when their stomata are open. CAM plants store the CO2 mostly in the form of malic acid via carboxylation of phosphoenolpyruvat
e to oxaloacetate, which is then reduced to malate. Decarboxylation of malate during the day releases CO2 inside the leaves, thus allowing carbon fixation to 3-phosphoglycerate by RuBisCO. CAM is used by 16,000 species of plants.36
Calcium-oxalate-accumulating plants, such as Amaranthus hybridus and Colobanthus quitensis, show a variation of photosynthesis where calcium oxalate crystals function as dynamic carbon pools, supplying carbon dioxide (CO2) to photosynthetic cells when stomata are part
ially or totally closed. This process was named alarm photosynthesis. Under stress conditions (e.g., water deficit), oxalate released from calcium oxalate crystals is converted to CO2 by an oxalate oxidase enzyme, and the produced CO2 can support the Calvin cycle reactions. Reactive hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), the byproduct of oxalate oxidase reaction, can be neutralized by catalase. Alarm photosynthesis represents a photosynthetic variant to be added to the well-known C4 and CAM pathways. However
, alarm photosynthesis, in contrast to these pathways, operates as a biochemical pump that collects carbon from the organ interior (or from the soil) and not from the atmosphere.3738
Cyanobacteria possess carboxysomes, which increase the concentration of CO2 around RuBisCO to increase the rate of photosynthesis. An enzyme, carbonic anhydrase, located within the carboxysome, releases CO2 from dissolved hydrocarbonate ions (HCO−3). Before the CO2 can diffuse out, RuBisCO concentrated within the ca
rboxysome quickly sponges it up. HCO−3 ions are made from CO2 outside the cell by another carbonic anhydrase and are actively pumped into the cell by a membrane protein. They cannot cross the membrane as they are charged, and within the cytosol they turn back into CO2 very slowly without the help of carbonic anhydrase. This causes the HCO−3 ions to accumulate within the cell from where they diffuse into the carboxysomes.39 Pyrenoids in algae and hornworts also act to concentrate CO2 around RuBis
CO.4041
The overall process of photosynthesis takes place in four stages:14
Plants usually convert light into chemical energy with a photosynthetic efficiency of 3–6%.4243
Absorbed light that is unconverted is dissipated primarily as heat, with a small fraction (1–2%) reemitted as chlorophyll fluorescence at longer (redder) wavelengths. This fact allows measurement of the light reaction of photosynthesis by using chlorophyll fluorometers.44
Actual plants' photosynthetic efficiency varies with th
e frequency of the light being converted, light intensity, temperature, and proportion of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere, and can vary from 0.1% to 8%.45 By comparison, solar panels convert light into electric energy at an efficiency of approximately 6–20% for mass-produced panels, and above 40% in laboratory devices.
Scientists are studying photosynthesis in hopes of developing plants with increased yield.43
The efficiency of both light and dark reactions can be measured, but the relationship
 between the two can be complex. For example, the light reaction creates ATP and NADPH energy molecules, which C3 plants can use for carbon fixation or photorespiration.46 Electrons may also flow to other electron sinks.474849 For this reason, it is not uncommon for authors to differentiate between work done under non-photorespiratory conditions and under photorespiratory conditions.505152
Chlorophyll fluorescence of photosystem II can measure the light reaction, and infrared gas analyzers can m
easure the dark reaction.53 An integrated chlorophyll fluorometer and gas exchange system can investigate both light and dark reactions when researchers use the two separate systems together.54 Infrared gas analyzers and some moisture sensors are sensitive enough to measure the photosynthetic assimilation of CO2 and of ΔH2O using reliable methods. CO2 is commonly measured in μmols/(m2/s), parts per million, or volume per million; and H2O is commonly measured in mmols/(m2/s) or in mbars. By measu
ring CO2 assimilation, ΔH2O, leaf temperature, barometric pressure, leaf area, and photosynthetically active radiation (PAR), it becomes possible to estimate, "A" or carbon assimilation, "E" or transpiration, "gs" or stomatal conductance, and "Ci" or intracellular CO2.55 However, it is more common to use chlorophyll fluorescence for plant stress measurement, where appropriate, because the most commonly used parameters FV/FM and Y(II) or F/FM' can be measured in a few seconds, allowing the invest
igation of larger plant populations.52
Gas exchange systems that offer control of CO2 levels, above and below ambient, allow the common practice of measurement of A/Ci curves, at different CO2 levels, to characterize a plant's photosynthetic response.55
Integrated chlorophyll fluorometer – gas exchange systems allow a more precise measure of photosynthetic response and mechanisms.5354 While standard gas exchange photosynthesis systems can measure Ci, or substomatal CO2 levels, the addition of in
tegrated chlorophyll fluorescence measurements allows a more precise measurement of CC, the estimation of CO2 concentration at the site of carboxylation in the chloroplast, to replace Ci.5453 CO2 concentration in the chloroplast becomes possible to estimate with the measurement of mesophyll conductance or gm using an integrated system.535456
Photosynthesis measurement systems are not designed to directly measure the amount of light the leaf absorbs, but analysis of chlorophyll fluorescence, P700
- and P515-absorbance, and gas exchange measurements reveal detailed information about, e.g., the photosystems, quantum efficiency and the CO2 assimilation rates. With some instruments, even wavelength dependency of the photosynthetic efficiency can be analyzed.57
A phenomenon known as quantum walk increases the efficiency of the energy transport of light significantly. In the photosynthetic cell of an alga, bacterium, or plant, there are light-sensitive molecules called chromophores arranged in
 an antenna-shaped structure called a photocomplex. When a photon is absorbed by a chromophore, it is converted into a quasiparticle referred to as an exciton, which jumps from chromophore to chromophore towards the reaction center of the photocomplex, a collection of molecules that traps its energy in a chemical form accessible to the cell's metabolism. The exciton's wave properties enable it to cover a wider area and try out several possible paths simultaneously, allowing it to instantaneously
 "choose" the most efficient route, where it will have the highest probability of arriving at its destination in the minimum possible time.citation needed
Because that quantum walking takes place at temperatures far higher than quantum phenomena usually occur, it is only possible over very short distances. Obstacles in the form of destructive interference cause the particle to lose its wave properties for an instant before it regains them once again after it is freed from its locked position thr
ough a classic "hop". The movement of the electron towards the photo center is therefore covered in a series of conventional hops and quantum walks.585960
Fossils of what are thought to be filamentous photosynthetic organisms have been dated at 3.4 billion years old.6162 More recent studies also suggest that photosynthesis may have begun about 3.4 billion years ago,6364 though the first direct evidence of photosynthesis comes from thylakoid membranes preserved in 1.75-billion-year-old cherts.65

Oxygenic photosynthesis is the main source of oxygen in the Earth's atmosphere, and its earliest appearance is sometimes referred to as the oxygen catastrophe. Geological evidence suggests that oxygenic photosynthesis, such as that in cyanobacteria, became important during the Paleoproterozoic era around two billion years ago. Modern photosynthesis in plants and most photosynthetic prokaryotes is oxygenic, using water as an electron donor, which is oxidized to molecular oxygen in the photosynthe
tic reaction center.
Several groups of animals have formed symbiotic relationships with photosynthetic algae. These are most common in corals, sponges, and sea anemones. Scientists presume that this is due to the particularly simple body plans and large surface areas of these animals compared to their volumes.66 In addition, a few marine mollusks, such as Elysia viridis and Elysia chlorotica, also maintain a symbiotic relationship with chloroplasts they capture from the algae in their diet and t
hen store in their bodies (see Kleptoplasty). This allows the mollusks to survive solely by photosynthesis for several months at a time.6768 Some of the genes from the plant cell nucleus have even been transferred to the slugs, so that the chloroplasts can be supplied with proteins they need to survive.69
An even closer form of symbiosis may explain the origin of chloroplasts. Chloroplasts have many similarities with photosynthetic bacteria, including a circular chromosome, prokaryotic-type ribo
some, and similar proteins in the photosynthetic reaction center.7071 The endosymbiotic theory suggests that photosynthetic bacteria were acquired (by endocytosis) by early eukaryotic cells to form the first plant cells. Therefore, chloroplasts may be photosynthetic bacteria that adapted to life inside plant cells. Like mitochondria, chloroplasts possess their own DNA, separate from the nuclear DNA of their plant host cells and the genes in this chloroplast DNA resemble those found in cyanobacte
ria.72 DNA in chloroplasts codes for redox proteins such as those found in the photosynthetic reaction centers. The CoRR Hypothesis proposes that this co-location of genes with their gene products is required for redox regulation of gene expression, and accounts for the persistence of DNA in bioenergetic organelles.73
Symbiotic and kleptoplastic organisms excluded:
Except for the euglenids, which are found within the Excavata, all of these belong to the Diaphoretickes. Archaeplastida and the pho
tosynthetic Paulinella got their plastids, which are surrounded by two membranes, through primary endosymbiosis in two separate events, by engulfing a cyanobacterium. The plastids in all the other groups have either a red or green algal origin, and are referred to as the "red lineages" and the "green lineages". The only known exception is the ciliate Pseudoblepharisma tenue, which in addition to its plastids that originated from green algae also has a purple sulfur bacterium as symbiont. In dino
flagellates and euglenids the plastids are surrounded by three membranes, and in the remaining lines by four. A nucleomorph, remnants of the original algal nucleus located between the inner and outer membranes of the plastid, is present in the cryptophytes (from a red alga) and chlorarachniophytes (from a green alga).74
Some dinoflagellates that lost their photosynthetic ability later regained it again through new endosymbiotic events with different algae.
While able to perform photosynthesis, m
any of these eukaryotic groups are mixotrophs and practice heterotrophy to various degrees.
Early photosynthetic systems, such as those in green and purple sulfur and green and purple nonsulfur bacteria, are thought to have been anoxygenic, and used various other molecules than water as electron donors. Green and purple sulfur bacteria are thought to have used hydrogen and sulfur as electron donors. Green nonsulfur bacteria used various amino and other organic acids as electron donors. Purple no
nsulfur bacteria used a variety of nonspecific organic molecules. The use of these molecules is consistent with the geological evidence that Earth's early atmosphere was highly reducing at that time.75
With a possible exception of Heimdallarchaeota, photosynthesis is not found in archaea.76 Haloarchaea are photoheterotrophic; they can absorb energy from the sun, but do not harvest carbon from the atmosphere and are therefore not photosynthetic.77 Instead of chlorophyll they use rhodopsins, which
 convert light-energy to ion gradients but cannot mediate electron transfer reactions.7879
In bacteria eight photosynthetic lineages are currently known:80818283
The biochemical capacity to use water as the source for electrons in photosynthesis evolved once, in a common ancestor of extant cyanobacteria (formerly called blue-green algae). The geological record indicates that this transforming event took place early in Earth's history, at least 2450–2320 million years ago (Ma), and, it is specula
ted, much earlier.8485 Because the Earth's atmosphere contained almost no oxygen during the estimated development of photosynthesis, it is believed that the first photosynthetic cyanobacteria did not generate oxygen.86 Available evidence from geobiological studies of Archean (2500 Ma) sedimentary rocks indicates that life existed 3500 Ma, but the question of when oxygenic photosynthesis evolved is still unanswered. A clear paleontological window on cyanobacterial evolution opened about 2000 Ma, 
revealing an already-diverse biota of cyanobacteria. Cyanobacteria remained the principal primary producers of oxygen throughout the Proterozoic Eon (2500–543 Ma), in part because the redox structure of the oceans favored photoautotrophs capable of nitrogen fixation.8788 Green algae joined cyanobacteria as the major primary producers of oxygen on continental shelves near the end of the Proterozoic, but only with the Mesozoic (251–66 Ma) radiations of dinoflagellates, coccolithophorids, and diato
ms did the primary production of oxygen in marine shelf waters take modern form. Cyanobacteria remain critical to marine ecosystems as primary producers of oxygen in oceanic gyres, as agents of biological nitrogen fixation, and, in modified form, as the plastids of marine algae.89
Although some of the steps in photosynthesis are still not completely understood, the overall photosynthetic equation has been known since the 19th century.
Jan van Helmont began the research of the process in the mid-
17th century when he carefully measured the mass of the soil a plant was using and the mass of the plant as it grew. After noticing that the soil mass changed very little, he hypothesized that the mass of the growing plant must come from the water, the only substance he added to the potted plant. His hypothesis was partially accurate – much of the gained mass comes from carbon dioxide as well as water. However, this was a signaling point to the idea that the bulk of a plant's biomass comes from 
the inputs of photosynthesis, not the soil itself.
Joseph Priestley, a chemist and minister, discovered that when he isolated a volume of air under an inverted jar and burned a candle in it (which gave off CO2), the candle would burn out very quickly, much before it ran out of wax. He further discovered that a mouse could similarly "injure" air. He then showed that a plant could restore the air the candle and the mouse had "injured".90
In 1779, Jan Ingenhousz repeated Priestley's experiments. He
 discovered that it was the influence of sunlight on the plant that could cause it to revive a mouse in a matter of hours.9091
In 1796, Jean Senebier, a Swiss pastor, botanist, and naturalist, demonstrated that green plants consume carbon dioxide and release oxygen under the influence of light. Soon afterward, Nicolas-Théodore de Saussure showed that the increase in mass of the plant as it grows could not be due only to uptake of CO2 but also to the incorporation of water. Thus, the basic reacti
on by which organisms use photosynthesis to produce food (such as glucose) was outlined.92
Cornelis Van Niel made key discoveries explaining the chemistry of photosynthesis. By studying purple sulfur bacteria and green bacteria, he was the first to demonstrate that photosynthesis is a light-dependent redox reaction in which hydrogen reduces  carbon dioxide.
Robert Emerson discovered two light reactions by testing plant productivity using different wavelengths of light. With the red alone, the li
ght reactions were suppressed. When blue and red were combined, the output was much more substantial. Thus, there were two photosystems, one absorbing up to 600nm wavelengths, the other up to 700nm. The former is known as PSII, the latter is PSI. PSI contains only chlorophyll "a", PSII contains primarily chlorophyll "a" with most of the available chlorophyll "b", among other pigments. These include phycobilins, which are the red and blue pigments of red and blue algae, respectively, and fucoxant
hol for brown algae and diatoms. The process is most productive when the absorption of quanta is equal in both PSII and PSI, assuring that input energy from the antenna complex is divided between the PSI and PSII systems, which in turn powers the photochemistry.14
Robert Hill thought that a complex of reactions consisted of an intermediate to cytochrome b6 (now a plastoquinone), and that another was from cytochrome f to a step in the carbohydrate-generating mechanisms. These are linked by plasto
quinone, which does require energy to reduce cytochrome f. Further experiments to prove that the oxygen developed during the photosynthesis of green plants came from water were performed by Hill in 1937 and 1939. He showed that isolated chloroplasts give off oxygen in the presence of unnatural reducing agents like iron oxalate, ferricyanide or benzoquinone after exposure to light. In the Hill reaction:93
A is the electron acceptor. Therefore, in light, the electron acceptor is reduced and oxygen
 is evolved. Samuel Ruben and Martin Kamen used radioactive isotopes to determine that the oxygen liberated in photosynthesis came from the water.
Melvin Calvin and Andrew Benson, along with James Bassham, elucidated the path of carbon assimilation  in plants. The carbon reduction cycle is known as the Calvin cycle, but many scientists refer to it as the Calvin-Benson, Benson-Calvin, or even Calvin-Benson-Bassham (or CBB) Cycle.
Nobel Prize–winning scientist Rudolph A. Marcus was later able to d
iscover the function and significance of the electron transport chain.
Otto Heinrich Warburg and Dean Burk discovered the I-quantum photosynthesis reaction that splits CO2, activated by the respiration.94
In 1950, first experimental evidence for the existence of photophosphorylation in vivo was presented by Otto Kandler using intact Chlorella cells and interpreting his findings as light-dependent ATP formation.95
In 1954, Daniel I. Arnon et al. discovered photophosphorylation in vitro in isolate
d chloroplasts with the help of P32.9697
Louis N. M. Duysens and Jan Amesz discovered that chlorophyll "a" will absorb one light, oxidize cytochrome f, while chlorophyll "a" (and other pigments) will absorb another light but will reduce this same oxidized cytochrome, stating the two light reactions are in series.
In 1893, the American botanist Charles Reid Barnes proposed two terms, photosyntax and photosynthesis, for the biological process of synthesis of complex carbon compounds out of carboni
c acid, in the presence of chlorophyll, under the influence of light. The term photosynthesis is derived from the Greek phōs (φῶς, 'gleam') and sýnthesis (σύνθεσις, 'arranging together'),9899100 while photosyntax comes from sýntaxis (σύνταξις, 'configuration'). Over time, the term photosynthesis came into common usage. Later discovery of anoxygenic photosynthetic bacteria and photophosphorylation necessitated redefinition of the term.101
In the late 1940s at the University of California, Berkele
y, the details of photosynthetic carbon metabolism were sorted out by the chemists Melvin Calvin, Andrew Benson, James Bassham and a score of students and researchers utilizing the carbon-14 isotope and paper chromatography techniques.102 The pathway of CO2 fixation by the algae Chlorella in a fraction of a second in light resulted in a three carbon molecule called phosphoglyceric acid (PGA). For that original and ground-breaking work, a Nobel Prize in Chemistry was awarded to Melvin Calvin in 1
961. In parallel, plant physiologists studied leaf gas exchanges using the new method of infrared gas analysis and a leaf chamber where the net photosynthetic rates ranged from 10 to 13 μmol CO2·m−2·s−1, with the conclusion that all terrestrial plants have the same photosynthetic capacities, that are light saturated at less than 50% of sunlight.103104
Later in 1958–1963 at Cornell University, field grown maize was reported to have much greater leaf photosynthetic rates of 40 μmol CO2·m−2·s−1 and
 not be saturated at near full sunlight.105106 This higher rate in maize was almost double of those observed in other species such as wheat and soybean, indicating that large differences in photosynthesis exist among higher plants. At the University of Arizona, detailed gas exchange research on more than 15 species of monocots and dicots uncovered for the first time that differences in leaf anatomy are crucial factors in differentiating photosynthetic capacities among species.107 In tropical gra
sses, including maize, sorghum, sugarcane, Bermuda grass and in the dicot amaranthus, leaf photosynthetic rates were around 38−40 μmol CO2·m−2·s−1, and the leaves have two types of green cells, i.e. outer layer of mesophyll cells surrounding a tightly packed cholorophyllous vascular bundle sheath cells. This type of anatomy was termed Kranz anatomy in the 19th century by the botanist Gottlieb Haberlandt while studying leaf anatomy of sugarcane.108 Plant species with the greatest photosynthetic r
ates and Kranz anatomy showed no apparent photorespiration, very low CO2 compensation point, high optimum temperature, high stomatal resistances and lower mesophyll resistances for gas diffusion and rates never saturated at full sun light.109 The research at Arizona was designated a Citation Classic in 1986.107 These species were later termed C4 plants as the first stable compound of CO2 fixation in light has four carbons as malate and aspartate.110111112 Other species that lack Kranz anatomy we
re termed C3 type such as cotton and sunflower, as the first stable carbon compound is the three-carbon PGA. At 1000 ppm CO2 in measuring air, both the C3 and C4 plants had similar leaf photosynthetic rates around 60 μmol CO2·m−2·s−1 indicating the suppression of photorespiration in C3 plants.107
There are four main factors influencing photosynthesis and several corollary factors. The four main are:113
Total photosynthesis is limited by a range of environmental factors. These include the amount 
of light available, the amount of leaf area a plant has to capture light , the rate at which carbon dioxide can be supplied to the chloroplasts to support photosynthesis, the availability of water, and the availability of suitable temperatures for carrying out photosynthesis.114
The process of photosynthesis provides the main input of free energy into the biosphere, and is one of four main ways in which radiation is important for plant life.115
The radiation climate within plant communities is e
xtremely variable, in both time and space.
In the early 20th century, Frederick Blackman and Gabrielle Matthaei investigated the effects of light intensity (irradiance) and temperature on the rate of carbon assimilation.
These two experiments illustrate several important points: First, it is known that, in general, photochemical reactions are not affected by temperature. However, these experiments clearly show that temperature affects the rate of carbon assimilation, so there must be two sets of
 reactions in the full process of carbon assimilation. These are the light-dependent 'photochemical' temperature-independent stage, and the light-independent, temperature-dependent stage. Second, Blackman's experiments illustrate the concept of limiting factors. Another limiting factor is the wavelength of light. Cyanobacteria, which reside several meters underwater, cannot receive the correct wavelengths required to cause photoinduced charge separation in conventional photosynthetic pigments. T
o combat this problem, Cyanobacteria have a light-harvesting complex called Phycobilisome.116 This complex is made up of a series of proteins with different pigments which surround the reaction center.
As carbon dioxide concentrations rise, the rate at which sugars are made by the light-independent reactions increases until limited by other factors. RuBisCO, the enzyme that captures carbon dioxide in the light-independent reactions, has a binding affinity for both carbon dioxide and oxygen. When
 the concentration of carbon dioxide is high, RuBisCO will fix carbon dioxide. However, if the carbon dioxide concentration is low, RuBisCO will bind oxygen instead of carbon dioxide. This process, called photorespiration, uses energy, but does not produce sugars.
RuBisCO oxygenase activity is disadvantageous to plants for several reasons:
The salvaging pathway for the products of RuBisCO oxygenase activity is more commonly known as photorespiration, since it is characterized by light-dependent 
oxygen consumption and the release of carbon dioxide.

In physics, gravity (from Latin gravitas 'weight'1), also known as gravitation or a gravitational interaction,2 is a fundamental interaction, which may be described as the force that draws material objects towards each other.
The gravitational attraction between clouds of primordial hydrogen and clumps of dark matter in the early universe caused the hydrogen gas to coalesce, eventually condensing and fusing to form stars. At larger scales this resulted in galaxies and clusters, so gravity is a p
rimary driver for the large-scale structures in the universe. Gravity has an infinite range, although its effects become weaker as objects get farther away.
Gravity is described by the general theory of relativity, proposed by Albert Einstein in 1915, which describes gravity in terms of the curvature of spacetime, caused by the uneven distribution of mass. The most extreme example of this curvature of spacetime is a black hole, from which nothing—not even light—can escape once past the black hol
e's event horizon.3 However, for most applications, gravity is sufficiently well approximated by Newton's law of universal gravitation, which describes gravity as an attractive force between any two bodies that is proportional to the product of their masses and inversely proportional to the square of the distance between them.
Scientists are looking for a theory that describes gravity in the framework of quantum mechanics (quantum gravity),4 which would unify gravity and the other known fundamen
tal interactions of physics in a single mathematical framework (a theory of everything).5
On the surface of a planetary body such as on Earth, the force of gravity operates towards the center of the body and is modified by the centrifugal effects arising from the rotation of the body.6 In this context, gravity gives weight to physical objects and is essential to understanding the mechanisms that are responsible for surface water waves, lunar tides and substantially contributes to weather pattern
s. Gravitational weight also has many important biological functions, helping to guide the growth of plants through the process of gravitropism and influencing the circulation of fluids in multicellular organisms.
Gravity is the word used to describe a physical law, a fundamental physical interaction that derives primarily from mass, and the observed consequences of that interaction on objects. Gravity is the law that every object with mass attracts every other object in the universe in proporti
on to each mass and inversely proportional to the square of the distance between them. The force of gravity, F is written using the gravitational constant, G, as7
Gravity is considered to be one of four fundamental interactions. The electromagnetic force law is similar to the force law for gravity: both depend upon the square of the inverse distance between objects in typical interactions. The ratio of gravitational attraction of two electrons to their electrical repulsion is 1 to 4.17×1042.7 As
 a result, gravity can generally be neglected at the level of subatomic particles.8 Gravity becomes the most significant interaction between objects at the scale of astronomical bodies, and it determines the motion of satellites, planets, stars, galaxies, and even light. Gravity is also fundamental in another sense: the inertial mass that appears in Newton's second law is the same as the gravitational mass. This equivalence principle is a scientific hypothesis that has been tested experimentally
 to more than one part in a trillion.9
The nature and mechanism of gravity were explored by a wide range of ancient scholars. In Ancient Greece, Aristotle believed that each of the classical elements had a natural place in the universe which it tends to move toward - earth at the center of the universe ; then water, air, fire, and aether in concentric shells from inner to outer.10 He also thought that the speed of a falling object should increase with its weight, a conclusion that was later show
n to be false.11 While Aristotle's view was widely accepted throughout Ancient Greece, there were other thinkers such as Plutarch who correctly predicted that the attraction of gravity was not unique to the Earth.12
Although he did not understand gravity as a force, the ancient Greek philosopher Archimedes discovered the center of gravity of a triangle.13 He postulated that if two equal weights did not have the same center of gravity, the center of gravity of the two weights together would be in
 the middle of the line that joins their centers of gravity.14 Two centuries later, the Roman engineer and architect Vitruvius contended in his De architectura that gravity is not dependent on a substance's weight but rather on its "nature".15 In the 6th century CE, the Byzantine Alexandrian scholar John Philoponus proposed the theory of impetus, which modifies Aristotle's theory that "continuation of motion depends on continued action of a force" by incorporating a causative force that diminish
es over time.16
In 628 CE, the Indian mathematician and astronomer Brahmagupta proposed the idea that gravity is an attractive force that draws objects to the Earth and used the term gurutvākarṣaṇ to describe it.171051819
In the ancient Middle East, gravity was a topic of fierce debate. The Persian intellectual Al-Biruni believed that the force of gravity was not unique to the Earth, and he correctly assumed that other heavenly bodies should exert a gravitational attraction as well.20 In contras
t, Al-Khazini held the same position as Aristotle that all matter in the Universe is attracted to the center of the Earth.21
In the mid-16th century, various European scientists experimentally disproved the Aristotelian notion that heavier objects fall at a faster rate.22 In particular, the Spanish Dominican priest Domingo de Soto wrote in 1551 that bodies in free fall uniformly accelerate.22 De Soto may have been influenced by earlier experiments conducted by other Dominican priests in Italy, i
ncluding those by Benedetto Varchi, Francesco Beato, Luca Ghini, and Giovan Bellaso which contradicted Aristotle's teachings on the fall of bodies.22
The mid-16th century Italian physicist Giambattista Benedetti published papers claiming that, due to specific gravity, objects made of the same material but with different masses would fall at the same speed.23 With the 1586 Delft tower experiment, the Flemish physicist Simon Stevin observed that two cannonballs of differing sizes and weights fell 
at the same rate when dropped from a tower.24
In the late 16th century, Galileo Galilei's careful measurements of balls rolling down inclines allowed him to firmly establish that gravitational acceleration is the same for all objects.2526334 Galileo postulated that air resistance is the reason that objects with a low density and high surface area fall more slowly in an atmosphere. In his 1638 work Two New Sciences, Galileo proved that the distance traveled by a falling object is proportional to 
the square of the time elapsed. His method was a form of graphical numerical integration since concepts of algebra and calculus were unknown at the time.274 This was later confirmed by Italian scientists Jesuits Grimaldi and Riccioli between 1640 and 1650. They also calculated the magnitude of the Earth's gravity by measuring the oscillations of a pendulum.28
Galileo also broke with incorrect ideas of Aristotelian philosophy by regarding inertia as persistence of motion, not a tendency to come t
o rest. By considering that the laws of physics appear identical on a moving ship to those on land, Galileo developed the concepts of reference frame and the principle of relativity.295 These concepts would become central to Newton's mechanics, only to be transformed in Einstein's theory of gravity, the general theory of relativity.3017
In last quarter of the 16th century Tycho Brahe created accurate tools for astrometry, providing careful observations of the planets. His assistant and successor
, Johannes Kepler analyzed these data into three empirical laws of planetary motion. These laws were central to the development of a theory of gravity a hundred years later.31
In his 1609 book Astronomia nova Kepler described gravity as a mutual attraction, claiming that if the Earth and Moon were not held apart by some force they would come together. He recognized that mechanical forces cause action, creating a kind of celestial machine. On the other hand Kepler viewed the force of the Sun on t
he planets as magnetic and acting tangential to their orbits and he assumed with Aristotle that inertia meant objects tend to come to rest.3233846
In 1666, Giovanni Alfonso Borelli avoided the key problems that limited Kepler. By Borelli's time the concept of inertia had its modern meaning as the tendency of objects to remain in uniform motion and he viewed the Sun as just another heavenly body. Borelli developed the idea of mechanical equilibrium, a balance between inertia and gravity. Newton c
ited Borelli's influence on his theory.33848
In 1657, Robert Hooke published his Micrographia, in which he hypothesized that the Moon must have its own gravity.3457 In a communication to the Royal Society in 1666 and his 1674 Gresham lecture, An Attempt to prove the Annual Motion of the Earth, Hooke took the important step of combining related hypothesis and then forming predictions based on the hypothesis.35 He wrote:
I will explain a system of the world very different from any yet received. It
 is founded on the following positions. 1. That all the heavenly bodies have not only a gravitation of their parts to their own proper centre, but that they also mutually attract each other within their spheres of action. 2. That all bodies having a simple motion, will continue to move in a straight line, unless continually deflected from it by some extraneous force, causing them to describe a circle, an ellipse, or some other curve. 3. That this attraction is so much the greater as the bodies a
re nearer. As to the proportion in which those forces diminish by an increase of distance, I own I have not discovered it....3637 Hooke was an important communicator who helped reformulate the scientific enterprise.38 He was one of the first professional scientists and worked as the then-new Royal Society's curator of experiments for 40 years.39 However his valuable insights remained hypotheses and some of these were incorrect.40 He was unable to develop a mathematical theory of gravity and work
 out the consequences.33853 For this he turned to Newton, writing him a letter in 1679, outlining a model of planetary motion in a void or vacuum due to attractive action at a distance. This letter likely turned Newton's thinking in a new direction leading to his revolutionary work on gravity.38 When Newton reported his results in 1686, Hooke claimed the inverse square law portion was his "notion".
Before 1684, scientists including Christopher Wren, Robert Hooke and Edmund Halley determined that
 Kepler's third law, relating to planetary orbital periods, would prove the inverse square law if the orbits were circles. However the orbits were known to be ellipses. At Halley's suggestion, Newton tackled the problem and was able to prove that ellipses also proved the inverse square relation from Kepler's observations.3013 In 1684, Isaac Newton sent a manuscript to Edmond Halley titled De motu corporum in gyrum ('On the motion of bodies in an orbit'), which provided a physical justification f
or Kepler's laws of planetary motion.41 Halley was impressed by the manuscript and urged Newton to expand on it, and a few years later Newton published a groundbreaking book called Philosophiæ Naturalis Principia Mathematica .
The revolutionary aspect of Newton's theory of gravity was the unification of Earth-bound observations of acceleration with celestial mechanics.424 In his book, Newton described gravitation as a universal force, and claimed that it operated on objects "according to the qua
ntity of solid matter which they contain and propagates on all sides to immense distances always at the inverse square of the distances".43546 This formulation had two important parts. First was equating inertial mass and gravitational mass. Newton's 2nd law defines force via
for inertial mass, his law of gravitational force uses the same mass. Newton did experiments with pendulums to verify this concept as best he could.3011
The second aspect of Newton's formulation was the inverse square of di
stance. This aspect was not new: the astronomer Ismaël Bullialdus proposed it around 1640. Seeking proof, Newton made quantitative analysis around 1665, considering the period and distance of the Moon's orbit and considering the timing of objects falling on Earth. Newton did not publish these results at the time because he could not prove that the Earth's gravity acts as if all its mass were concentrated at its center. That proof took him twenty years.3013
Newton's Principia was well received by
 the scientific community, and his law of gravitation quickly spread across the European world. More than a century later, in 1821, his theory of gravitation rose to even greater prominence when it was used to predict the existence of Neptune. In that year, the French astronomer Alexis Bouvard used this theory to create a table modeling the orbit of Uranus, which was shown to differ significantly from the planet's actual trajectory. In order to explain this discrepancy, many astronomers speculat
ed that there might be a large object beyond the orbit of Uranus which was disrupting its orbit. In 1846, the astronomers John Couch Adams and Urbain Le Verrier independently used Newton's law to predict Neptune's location in the night sky, and the planet was discovered there within a day.4445
Newton's formulation was later condensed into the inverse-square law:
where F is the force, m1 and m2 are the masses of the objects interacting, r is the distance between the centers of the masses and G is
 the gravitational constant 6.674×10−11m3⋅kg−1⋅s−2.46 While G is also called Newton's constant, Newton did not use this constant or formula, he only discussed proportionality. But this allowed him to come to an astounding conclusion we take for granted today: the gravity of the Earth on the Moon is the same as the gravity of the Earth on an apple:
Using the values known at the time, Newton was able to verify this form of his law. The value of G was eventually measured by Henry Cavendish in 1797.
4731
Newton's theory of gravity ran counter to a key idea of science, both then and now: forces should not rely on instantaneous action at a distance. Newton was well aware of this issue and his decision to continue anyway marked a shift in scientific thinking away from philosophically sound but empirically flawed models.4844 Scientists like Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz complained about this aspect of the theory of gravity.
49339 The issue was not resolved until Einstein's work on relativity in the
 20th century.7
Eventually, astronomers noticed an eccentricity in the orbit of the planet Mercury which could not be explained by Newton's theory: the perihelion of the orbit was increasing by about 42.98 arcseconds per century. The most obvious explanation for this discrepancy was an as-yet-undiscovered celestial body, such as a planet orbiting the Sun even closer than Mercury, but all efforts to find such a body turned out to be fruitless. In 1915, Albert Einstein developed a theory of genera
l relativity which was able to accurately model Mercury's orbit.50
Einstein's theory brought two other ideas with independent histories into the physical theories of gravity: the principle of relativity and non-Euclidean geometry.
The principle of relativity, introduced by Galileo and used as a foundational principle by Newton, led to a long and fruitless search for a luminiferous aether after Maxwell's equations demonstrated that light propagated at a fixed speed independent of reference frame.
 In Newton's mechanics, velocities add: a cannon ball shot from a moving ship would travel with a trajectory which included the motion of the ship. Since light speed was fixed, it was assumed to travel in a fixed, absolute medium. Many experiments sought to reveal this medium but failed and in 1905 Einstein's special relativity theory showed the aether was not needed. Special relativity proposed that mechanics be reformulated to use the Lorentz transformation already applicable to light rather t
han the Galilean transformation adopted by Newton. Special relativity, as in special case, specifically did not cover gravity.304
While relativity was associated with mechanics and thus gravity, the idea of altering geometry only joined the story of gravity once mechanics required the Lorentz transformations. Geometry was an ancient science that gradually broke free of Euclidean limitations when Carl Gauss discovered in the 1800s that surfaces in any number of dimensions could be characterized b
y a metric, a distance measurement along the shortest path between two points that reduces to Euclidean distance at infinitesimal separation. Gauss' student Bernhard Riemann developed this into a complete geometry by 1854. These geometries are locally flat but have global curvature.304
In 1907, Einstein took his first step by using special relativity to create a new form of the equivalence principle. The equivalence of inertial mass and gravitational mass was a known empirical law. The m in Newt
on's first law,
. In what he later described as "the happiest thought of my life" Einstein realized this meant that in free-fall, an accelerated coordinate system exists with no local gravitational field.51 Every description of gravity in any other coordinate system must transform to give no field in the free-fall case, a powerful invariance constraint on all theories of gravity.3020
Einstein's description of gravity was accepted by the majority of physicists for two reasons. First, by 1910 his 
special relativity was accepted in German physics and was spreading to other countries. Second, his theory explained experimental results like the perihelion of Mercury and the bending of light around the Sun better than Newton's theory.52
In 1919, the British astrophysicist Arthur Eddington was able to confirm the predicted deflection of light during that year's solar eclipse.5354 Eddington measured starlight deflections twice those predicted by Newtonian corpuscular theory, in accordance with 
the predictions of general relativity. Although Eddington's analysis was later disputed, this experiment made Einstein famous almost overnight and caused general relativity to become widely accepted in the scientific community.55
In 1959, American physicists Robert Pound and Glen Rebka performed an experiment in which they used gamma rays to confirm the prediction of gravitational time dilation. By sending the rays down a 74-foot tower and measuring their frequency at the bottom, the scientists 
confirmed that light is Doppler shifted as it moves towards a source of gravity. The observed shift also supports the idea that time runs more slowly in the presence of a gravitational field . If light moves outward from a strong source of gravity it will be observed with a redshift.56 The time delay of light passing close to a massive object was first identified by Irwin I. Shapiro in 1964 in interplanetary spacecraft signals.57
In 1971, scientists made the first-ever discovery of a black hole,
 in the constellation Cygnus. The black hole was detected because it was emitting bursts of x-rays as it consumed a smaller star, and it came to be known as Cygnus X-1.58 This discovery confirmed yet another prediction of general relativity, because Einstein's equations implied that light could not escape from a sufficiently large and compact object.59
Frame dragging, the idea that a rotating massive object should twist spacetime around it, was confirmed by Gravity Probe B results in 2011.6061 I
n 2015, the LIGO observatory detected faint gravitational waves, the existence of which had been predicted by general relativity. Scientists believe that the waves emanated from a black hole merger that occurred 1.5 billion light-years away.62
Every planetary body (including the Earth) is surrounded by its own gravitational field, which can be conceptualized with Newtonian physics as exerting an attractive force on all objects. Assuming a spherically symmetrical planet, the strength of this fiel
d at any given point above the surface is proportional to the planetary body's mass and inversely proportional to the square of the distance from the center of the body.
The strength of the gravitational field is numerically equal to the acceleration of objects under its influence.63 The rate of acceleration of falling objects near the Earth's surface varies very slightly depending on latitude, surface features such as mountains and ridges, and perhaps unusually high or low sub-surface densities
.64 For purposes of weights and measures, a standard gravity value is defined by the International Bureau of Weights and Measures, under the International System of Units (SI).
The force of gravity experienced by objects on Earth's surface is the vector sum of two forces:6 (a) The gravitational attraction in accordance with Newton's universal law of gravitation, and (b) the centrifugal force, which results from the choice of an earthbound, rotating frame of reference. The force of gravity is wea
kest at the equator because of the centrifugal force caused by the Earth's rotation and because points on the equator are farthest from the center of the Earth. The force of gravity varies with latitude, and the resultant acceleration increases from about 9.780m/s2 at the Equator to about 9.832m/s2 at the poles.6566
Waves on oceans, lakes, and other bodies of water occur when the gravitational equilibrium at the surface of the water is disturbed by for example wind.67 Similar effects occur in th
e atmosphere where equilibrium is disturbed by thermal weather fronts or mountain ranges.68
Planets orbit the Sun in an ellipse as a consequence of the law of gravity. Similarly the Moon and artificial satellites orbit the Earth. Conceptually two objects in orbit are both falling off of the curve they would travel in if the force of gravity were not pulling them together. Since the force of gravity is universal, all planets attract each other with the most massive and closest pair have the most 
mutual affect. This means orbits are more complex than simple ellipses.7
During star formation, gravitational attraction in a cloud of hydrogen gas competes with thermal gas pressure. As the gas density increases, the temperature rises, then the gas radiates energy, allowing additional gravitational condensation. If the mass of gas in the region is low, the process continues until a brown dwarf or gas-giant planet is produced. If more mass is available, the additional gravitational energy allows
 the central region to reach pressures sufficient for nuclear fusion, forming a star. In a star, again the gravitational attraction competes, with thermal and radiation pressure in hydrostatic equilibrium until the star's atomic fuel runs out. The next phase depends upon the total mass of the star. Very low mass stars slowly cool as white dwarf stars with a small core balancing gravitational attraction with electron degeneracy pressure. Stars with masses similar to the Sun go through a red giant
 phase before becoming white dwarf stars. Higher mass stars have complex core structures that burn helium and high atomic number elements ultimately producing an iron core. As their fuel runs out, these stars become unstable producing a supernova. The result can be a neutron star where gravitational attraction balances neutron degeneracy pressure or, for even higher masses, a black hole where gravity operates alone with such intensity that even light cannot escape.69121
General relativity predic
ts that energy can be transported out of a system through gravitational radiation also known as gravitational waves. The first indirect evidence for gravitational radiation was through measurements of the Hulse–Taylor binary in 1973. This system consists of a pulsar and neutron star in orbit around one another. Its orbital period has decreased since its initial discovery due to a loss of energy, which is consistent for the amount of energy loss due to gravitational radiation. This research was a
warded the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1993.70
The first direct evidence for gravitational radiation was measured on 14 September 2015 by the LIGO detectors. The gravitational waves emitted during the collision of two black holes 1.3 billion light years from Earth were measured.7172 This observation confirms the theoretical predictions of Einstein and others that such waves exist. It also opens the way for practical observation and understanding of the nature of gravity and events in the Universe 
including the Big Bang.73 Neutron star and black hole formation also create detectable amounts of gravitational radiation.74 This research was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics in 2017.75
At the cosmological scale, gravity is a dominant player. About 5/6 of the total mass in the universe consists of dark matter which interacts through gravity but not through electromagnetic interactions. The gravitation of clumps of dark matter known as dark matter halos attract hydrogen gas leading to stars an
d galaxies.76
Gravity acts on light and matter equally, meaning that a sufficiently massive object could warp light around it and create a gravitational lens. This phenomenon was first confirmed by observation in 1979 using the 2.1 meter telescope at Kitt Peak National Observatory in Arizona, which saw two mirror images of the same quasar whose light had been bent around the galaxy YGKOW G1.7778
Many subsequent observations of gravitational lensing provide additional evidence for substantial amo
unts of dark matter around galaxies. Gravitational lenses do not focus like eyeglass lenses, but rather lead to annular shapes called Einstein rings.47370
In October 2017, the LIGO and Virgo interferometer detectors received gravitational wave signals 2 seconds before gamma ray satellites and optical telescopes seeing signals from the same direction, from a source about 130 million light-years away. This confirmed that the speed of gravitational waves was the same as the speed of light.79
There 
are some observations that are not adequately accounted for, which may point to the need for better theories of gravity or perhaps be explained in other ways.
The physical models of gravity, like all physical models, are expressed mathematically. Physicists use several different models, depending on the problem to be solved or for the purpose of gaining physical intuition.8644
Newton's inverse square law models gravity as a force F between two objects proportional to their mass, m:
This gravitat
ional force causes the objects to accelerate towards each other unless balanced by other forces. The force is "nonlocal": it depends on the mass of an object at a distance.8644 Scientists from Newton onwards recognized that this action at a distance does not explain the root cause of the force; this lack of a root cause was raised against Newton's theory at first.87339 Nevertheless the model explains a vast number of physical effects including cannon ball trajectories, tidal motion and planetary
 orbits.864 Creating a theory independent of action at a distance requires combining the concept of relativity with gravity, an enormously complex task using the Newtonian model.8648
A second equivalent approach to model gravity uses fields.8644 In physics, a field represents a physical phenomenon using a mathematical entity associated with each point in a space. Different field theories use different entities and concepts of space. For classical field theories of gravity, the entities can be ve
ctors associated with points in a 3-dimensional space. Each vector gives the force experienced by an insignificantly small test mass at that point in space. The force vector at each point can be computed as the direction of the highest rate of change in the gravitational potential, a single number at each point in space. The three-dimensional map of the potential or of the gravitational field provides a visual representation of the effect of the gravitational effect of all surrounding objects.du
bious discuss Field models are local: the field values on a sphere completely determine the effects of gravity with the sphere.8645
Fields are also used in general relativity, but rather than vectors over Euclidean space, the entities are tensors over spacetime. The Einstein field equations relate the 10 independent values in the tensors to the distribution of mass and energy in space.dubious discuss
A third completely different way to derive a model of gravity is based on action principles. Thi
s formulation represents the effects of gravity on a system in a mathematically abstract way. The state of the system, for example the position and velocity of every particle, is expressed as a single mathematical entity. Each state has an associated energy property called the Lagrangian; the physically allowed changes to the state of the system minimize the value of this property. The path of the state is not a path in physical space, but rather in a high-dimensional state space: each point alo
ng the path corresponds to a different position and or velocity collectively for all particles in the system. This formulation does not express the forces or fields of the individual particles.8646 Modern theories of physics rely on these action principles.88396 The Einstein field equation for gravitation can be derived from the Einstein–Hilbert action.88388
In modern physics, general relativity is considered the most successful theory of gravitation.89 Physicists continue to work to find soluti
ons to the Einstein field equations that form the basis of general relativity and continue to test the theory, finding excellent agreement in all cases.909192p.9
Any theory of gravity must conform to the requirements of special relativity and experimental observations. Newton's theory of gravity assumes action at a distance and therefore cannot be reconciled with special relativity. The simplest generalization of Newton's approach would be a scalar field theory with the gravitational potential r
epresented by a single number in a 4-dimensional spacetime. However, this type of theory fails to predict gravitational redshift or the deviation of light by matter and gives values for the precession of Mercury which are incorrect. A vector field theory predicts negative energy gravitational waves so it also fails. Furthermore, no theory without curvature in spacetime can be consistent with special relativity. The simplest theory consistent with special relativity and the well-studied observati
ons is general relativity.93
Unlike Newton's formula with one parameter, G, force in general relativity is terms of 10 numbers formed in to a metric tensor.3070In general relativity the effects of gravitation are described in different ways in different frames of reference. In a free-falling or co-moving coordinate system, an object travels in a straight line. In other coordinate systems, the object accelerates and thus is seen to move under a force. The path in spacetime (not 3D space) taken by
 a free-falling object is called a geodesic and the length of that path as measured by time in the objects frame is the shortest (or rarely the longest) one. Consequently the effect of gravity can be described as curving spacetime. In a weak stationary gravitational field, general relativity reduces to Newton's equations. The corrections introduced by general relativity on Earth are on the order of 1 part in a billion.3077
The Einstein field equations are a system of 10 partial differential equa
tions which describe how matter affects the curvature of spacetime. The system may be expressed in the form
where Gμν is the Einstein tensor, gμν is the metric tensor, Tμν is the stress–energy tensor, Λ is the cosmological constant,
is the Newtonian constant of gravitation and
is referred to as the Einstein gravitational constant.95
The non-linear second-order Einstein field equations are extremely complex and have been solved in only a few special cases.96 These cases however have been transfor
mational in our understanding of the cosmos. Several solutions are the basis for understanding black holes and for our modern model of the evolution of the universe since the Big Bang.42227
Testing the predictions of general relativity has historically been difficult, because they are almost identical to the predictions of Newtonian gravity for small energies and masses.97 A wide range of experiments provided support of general relativity.921–99899100101 Today, Einstein's theory of relativity is
 used for all gravitational calculations where absolute precision is desired, although Newton's inverse-square law is accurate enough for virtually all ordinary calculations.9279102
Despite its success in predicting the effects of gravity at large scales, general relativity is ultimately incompatible with quantum mechanics. This is because general relativity describes gravity as a smooth, continuous distortion of spacetime, while quantum mechanics holds that all forces arise from the exchange of
 discrete particles known as quanta. This contradiction is especially vexing to physicists because the other three fundamental forces  were reconciled with a quantum framework decades ago.103 As a result, researchers have begun to search for a theory that could unite both gravity and quantum mechanics under a more general framework.104
One path is to describe gravity in the framework of quantum field theory (QFT), which has been successful to accurately describe the other fundamental interaction
s. The electromagnetic force arises from an exchange of virtual photons, where the QFT description of gravity is that there is an exchange of virtual gravitons.105106 This description reproduces general relativity in the classical limit. However, this approach fails at short distances of the order of the Planck length,107 where a more complete theory of quantum gravity (or a new approach to quantum mechanics) is required.
General relativity has withstood many tests over a large range of mass and
 size scales.108109 When applied to interpret astronomical observations, cosmological models based on general relativity introduce two components to the universe,110 dark matter111 and dark energy,112 the nature of which is currently an unsolved problem in physics. The many successful, high precision predictions of the standard model of cosmology has led astrophysicists to conclude it and thus general relativity will be the basis for future progress.113114 However, dark matter is not supported b
y the Standard Model of particle physics, physical models for dark energy do not match cosmological data, and some cosmological observations are inconsistent.114 These issues have led to the study of alternative theories of gravity.115

Evolution is the change in the heritable characteristics of biological populations over successive generations.12 It occurs when evolutionary processes such as genetic drift and natural selection act on genetic variation, resulting in certain characteristics becoming more or less common within a population over successive generations.3 The process of evolution has given rise to biodiversity at every level of biological organisation.45
The scientific theory of evolution by natural selection was c
onceived independently by two British naturalists, Charles Darwin and Alfred Russel Wallace, in the mid-19th century as an explanation for why organisms are adapted to their physical and biological environments. The theory was first set out in detail in Darwin's book On the Origin of Species.6 Evolution by natural selection is established by observable facts about living organisms: (1) more offspring are often produced than can possibly survive; (2) traits vary among individuals with respect to 
their morphology, physiology, and behaviour; (3) different traits confer different rates of survival and reproduction (differential fitness); and (4) traits can be passed from generation to generation (heritability of fitness).7 In successive generations, members of a population are therefore more likely to be replaced by the offspring of parents with favourable characteristics for that environment.
In the early 20th century, competing ideas of evolution were refuted and evolution was combined w
ith Mendelian inheritance and population genetics to give rise to modern evolutionary theory.8 In this synthesis the basis for heredity is in DNA molecules that pass information from generation to generation. The processes that change DNA in a population include natural selection, genetic drift, mutation, and gene flow.3
All life on Earth—including humanity—shares a last universal common ancestor (LUCA),91011 which lived approximately 3.5–3.8billion years ago.12 The fossil record includes a prog
ression from early biogenic graphite13 to microbial mat fossils141516 to fossilised multicellular organisms. Existing patterns of biodiversity have been shaped by repeated formations of new species (speciation), changes within species (anagenesis), and loss of species (extinction) throughout the evolutionary history of life on Earth.17 Morphological and biochemical traits tend to be more similar among species that share a more recent common ancestor, which historically was used to reconstruct ph
ylogenetic trees, although direct comparison of genetic sequences is a more common method today.1819
Evolutionary biologists have continued to study various aspects of evolution by forming and testing hypotheses as well as constructing theories based on evidence from the field or laboratory and on data generated by the methods of mathematical and theoretical biology. Their discoveries have influenced not just the development of biology but also other fields including agriculture, medicine, and c
omputer science.20
Evolution in organisms occurs through changes in heritable characteristics—the inherited characteristics of an organism. In humans, for example, eye colour is an inherited characteristic and an individual might inherit the "brown-eye trait" from one of their parents.21 Inherited traits are controlled by genes and the complete set of genes within an organism's genome (genetic material) is called its genotype.22
The complete set of observable traits that make up the structure an
d behaviour of an organism is called its phenotype. Some of these traits come from the interaction of its genotype with the environment while others are neutral.23 Some observable characteristics are not inherited. For example, suntanned skin comes from the interaction between a person's genotype and sunlight; thus, suntans are not passed on to people's children. The phenotype is the ability of the skin to tan when exposed to sunlight. However, some people tan more easily than others, due to dif
ferences in genotypic variation; a striking example are people with the inherited trait of albinism, who do not tan at all and are very sensitive to sunburn.24
Heritable characteristics are passed from one generation to the next via DNA, a molecule that encodes genetic information.22 DNA is a long biopolymer composed of four types of bases. The sequence of bases along a particular DNA molecule specifies the genetic information, in a manner similar to a sequence of letters spelling out a sentence
. Before a cell divides, the DNA is copied, so that each of the resulting two cells will inherit the DNA sequence. Portions of a DNA molecule that specify a single functional unit are called genes; different genes have different sequences of bases. Within cells, each long strand of DNA is called a chromosome. The specific location of a DNA sequence within a chromosome is known as a locus. If the DNA sequence at a locus varies between individuals, the different forms of this sequence are called a
lleles. DNA sequences can change through mutations, producing new alleles. If a mutation occurs within a gene, the new allele may affect the trait that the gene controls, altering the phenotype of the organism.25 However, while this simple correspondence between an allele and a trait works in some cases, most traits are influenced by multiple genes in a quantitative or epistatic manner.2627
Evolution can occur if there is genetic variation within a population. Variation comes from mutations in t
he genome, reshuffling of genes through sexual reproduction and migration between populations (gene flow). Despite the constant introduction of new variation through mutation and gene flow, most of the genome of a species is very similar among all individuals of that species.28 However, discoveries in the field of evolutionary developmental biology have demonstrated that even relatively small differences in genotype can lead to dramatic differences in phenotype both within and between species.
A
n individual organism's phenotype results from both its genotype and the influence of the environment it has lived in.27 The modern evolutionary synthesis defines evolution as the change over time in this genetic variation. The frequency of one particular allele will become more or less prevalent relative to other forms of that gene. Variation disappears when a new allele reaches the point of fixation—when it either disappears from the population or replaces the ancestral allele entirely.29
Muta
tions are changes in the DNA sequence of a cell's genome and are the ultimate source of genetic variation in all organisms.30 When mutations occur, they may alter the product of a gene, or prevent the gene from functioning, or have no effect.
About half of the mutations in the coding regions of protein-coding genes are deleterious — the other half are neutral. A small percentage of the total mutations in this region confer a fitness benefit.31 Some of the mutations in other parts of the genome a
re deleterious but the vast majority are neutral. A few are beneficial.
Mutations can involve large sections of a chromosome becoming duplicated (usually by genetic recombination), which can introduce extra copies of a gene into a genome.32 Extra copies of genes are a major source of the raw material needed for new genes to evolve.33 This is important because most new genes evolve within gene families from pre-existing genes that share common ancestors.34 For example, the human eye uses four gen
es to make structures that sense light: three for colour vision and one for night vision; all four are descended from a single ancestral gene.35
New genes can be generated from an ancestral gene when a duplicate copy mutates and acquires a new function. This process is easier once a gene has been duplicated because it increases the redundancy of the system; one gene in the pair can acquire a new function while the other copy continues to perform its original function.3637 Other types of mutation
s can even generate entirely new genes from previously noncoding DNA, a phenomenon termed de novo gene birth.3839
The generation of new genes can also involve small parts of several genes being duplicated, with these fragments then recombining to form new combinations with new functions (exon shuffling).4041 When new genes are assembled from shuffling pre-existing parts, domains act as modules with simple independent functions, which can be mixed together to produce new combinations with new and
 complex functions.42 For example, polyketide synthases are large enzymes that make antibiotics; they contain up to 100 independent domains that each catalyse one step in the overall process, like a step in an assembly line.43
One example of mutation is wild boar piglets. They are camouflage coloured and show a characteristic pattern of dark and light longitudinal stripes. However, mutations in the melanocortin 1 receptor (MC1R) disrupt the pattern. The majority of pig breeds carry MC1R mutation
s disrupting wild-type colour and different mutations causing dominant black colouring.44
In asexual organisms, genes are inherited together, or linked, as they cannot mix with genes of other organisms during reproduction. In contrast, the offspring of sexual organisms contain random mixtures of their parents' chromosomes that are produced through independent assortment. In a related process called homologous recombination, sexual organisms exchange DNA between two matching chromosomes.45 Recomb
ination and reassortment do not alter allele frequencies, but instead change which alleles are associated with each other, producing offspring with new combinations of alleles.46 Sex usually increases genetic variation and may increase the rate of evolution.4748
The two-fold cost of sex was first described by John Maynard Smith.49 The first cost is that in sexually dimorphic species only one of the two sexes can bear young. This cost does not apply to hermaphroditic species, like most plants and
 many invertebrates. The second cost is that any individual who reproduces sexually can only pass on 50% of its genes to any individual offspring, with even less passed on as each new generation passes.50 Yet sexual reproduction is the more common means of reproduction among eukaryotes and multicellular organisms. The Red Queen hypothesis has been used to explain the significance of sexual reproduction as a means to enable continual evolution and adaptation in response to coevolution with other 
species in an ever-changing environment.50515253 Another hypothesis is that sexual reproduction is primarily an adaptation for promoting accurate recombinational repair of damage in germline DNA, and that increased diversity is a byproduct of this process that may sometimes be adaptively beneficial.5455
Gene flow is the exchange of genes between populations and between species.56 It can therefore be a source of variation that is new to a population or to a species. Gene flow can be caused by the
 movement of individuals between separate populations of organisms, as might be caused by the movement of mice between inland and coastal populations, or the movement of pollen between heavy-metal-tolerant and heavy-metal-sensitive populations of grasses.
Gene transfer between species includes the formation of hybrid organisms and horizontal gene transfer. Horizontal gene transfer is the transfer of genetic material from one organism to another organism that is not its offspring; this is most co
mmon among bacteria.57 In medicine, this contributes to the spread of antibiotic resistance, as when one bacteria acquires resistance genes it can rapidly transfer them to other species.58 Horizontal transfer of genes from bacteria to eukaryotes such as the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae and the adzuki bean weevil Callosobruchus chinensis has occurred.5960 An example of larger-scale transfers are the eukaryotic bdelloid rotifers, which have received a range of genes from bacteria, fungi and plan
ts.61 Viruses can also carry DNA between organisms, allowing transfer of genes even across biological domains.62
Large-scale gene transfer has also occurred between the ancestors of eukaryotic cells and bacteria, during the acquisition of chloroplasts and mitochondria. It is possible that eukaryotes themselves originated from horizontal gene transfers between bacteria and archaea.63
Some heritable changes cannot be explained by changes to the sequence of nucleotides in the DNA. These phenomena a
re classed as epigenetic inheritance systems.64 DNA methylation marking chromatin, self-sustaining metabolic loops, gene silencing by RNA interference and the three-dimensional conformation of proteins (such as prions) are areas where epigenetic inheritance systems have been discovered at the organismic level.65 Developmental biologists suggest that complex interactions in genetic networks and communication among cells can lead to heritable variations that may underlay some of the mechanics in d
evelopmental plasticity and canalisation.66 Heritability may also occur at even larger scales. For example, ecological inheritance through the process of niche construction is defined by the regular and repeated activities of organisms in their environment. This generates a legacy of effects that modify and feed back into the selection regime of subsequent generations.67 Other examples of heritability in evolution that are not under the direct control of genes include the inheritance of cultural
 traits and symbiogenesis.6869
From a neo-Darwinian perspective, evolution occurs when there are changes in the frequencies of alleles within a population of interbreeding organisms,70 for example, the allele for black colour in a population of moths becoming more common. Mechanisms that can lead to changes in allele frequencies include natural selection, genetic drift, and mutation bias.
Evolution by natural selection is the process by which traits that enhance survival and reproduction become 
more common in successive generations of a population. It embodies three principles:7
More offspring are produced than can possibly survive, and these conditions produce competition between organisms for survival and reproduction. Consequently, organisms with traits that give them an advantage over their competitors are more likely to pass on their traits to the next generation than those with traits that do not confer an advantage.71 This teleonomy is the quality whereby the process of natural 
selection creates and preserves traits that are seemingly fitted for the functional roles they perform.72 Consequences of selection include nonrandom mating73 and genetic hitchhiking.
The central concept of natural selection is the evolutionary fitness of an organism.74 Fitness is measured by an organism's ability to survive and reproduce, which determines the size of its genetic contribution to the next generation.74 However, fitness is not the same as the total number of offspring: instead fit
ness is indicated by the proportion of subsequent generations that carry an organism's genes.75 For example, if an organism could survive well and reproduce rapidly, but its offspring were all too small and weak to survive, this organism would make little genetic contribution to future generations and would thus have low fitness.74
If an allele increases fitness more than the other alleles of that gene, then with each generation this allele has a higher probability of becoming common within the 
population. These traits are said to be selected for. Examples of traits that can increase fitness are enhanced survival and increased fecundity. Conversely, the lower fitness caused by having a less beneficial or deleterious allele results in this allele likely becoming rarer—they are selected against.76
Importantly, the fitness of an allele is not a fixed characteristic; if the environment changes, previously neutral or harmful traits may become beneficial and previously beneficial traits beco
me harmful.25 However, even if the direction of selection does reverse in this way, traits that were lost in the past may not re-evolve in an identical form.7778 However, a re-activation of dormant genes, as long as they have not been eliminated from the genome and were only suppressed perhaps for hundreds of generations, can lead to the re-occurrence of traits thought to be lost like hindlegs in dolphins, teeth in chickens, wings in wingless stick insects, tails and additional nipples in humans
 etc. "Throwbacks" such as these are known as atavisms.79
Natural selection within a population for a trait that can vary across a range of values, such as height, can be categorised into three different types. The first is directional selection, which is a shift in the average value of a trait over time—for example, organisms slowly getting taller.80 Secondly, disruptive selection is selection for extreme trait values and often results in two different values becoming most common, with selectio
n against the average value. This would be when either short or tall organisms had an advantage, but not those of medium height. Finally, in stabilising selection there is selection against extreme trait values on both ends, which causes a decrease in variance around the average value and less diversity.7181 This would, for example, cause organisms to eventually have a similar height.
Natural selection most generally makes nature the measure against which individuals and individual traits, are m
ore or less likely to survive. "Nature" in this sense refers to an ecosystem, that is, a system in which organisms interact with every other element, physical as well as biological, in their local environment. Eugene Odum, a founder of ecology, defined an ecosystem as: "Any unit that includes all of the organisms...in a given area interacting with the physical environment so that a flow of energy leads to clearly defined trophic structure, biotic diversity, and material cycles  within the system
...."82 Each population within an ecosystem occupies a distinct niche, or position, with distinct relationships to other parts of the system. These relationships involve the life history of the organism, its position in the food chain and its geographic range. This broad understanding of nature enables scientists to delineate specific forces which, together, comprise natural selection.
Natural selection can act at different levels of organisation, such as genes, cells, individual organisms, grou
ps of organisms and species.838485 Selection can act at multiple levels simultaneously.86 An example of selection occurring below the level of the individual organism are genes called transposons, which can replicate and spread throughout a genome.87 Selection at a level above the individual, such as group selection, may allow the evolution of cooperation.88
Genetic drift is the random fluctuation of allele frequencies within a population from one generation to the next.89 When selective forces 
are absent or relatively weak, allele frequencies are equally likely to drift upward or downwardclarification needed in each successive generation because the alleles are subject to sampling error.90 This drift halts when an allele eventually becomes fixed, either by disappearing from the population or by replacing the other alleles entirely. Genetic drift may therefore eliminate some alleles from a population due to chance alone. Even in the absence of selective forces, genetic drift can cause 
two separate populations that begin with the same genetic structure to drift apart into two divergent populations with different sets of alleles.91
According to the neutral theory of molecular evolution most evolutionary changes are the result of the fixation of neutral mutations by genetic drift.92 In this model, most genetic changes in a population are thus the result of constant mutation pressure and genetic drift.93 This form of the neutral theory has been debated since it does not seem to f
it some genetic variation seen in nature.9495 A better-supported version of this model is the nearly neutral theory, according to which a mutation that would be effectively neutral in a small population is not necessarily neutral in a large population.71 Other theories propose that genetic drift is dwarfed by other stochastic forces in evolution, such as genetic hitchhiking, also known as genetic draft.909697 Another concept is constructive neutral evolution (CNE), which explains that complex sy
stems can emerge and spread into a population through neutral transitions due to the principles of excess capacity, presuppression, and ratcheting,9899100 and it has been applied in areas ranging from the origins of the spliceosome to the complex interdependence of microbial communities.101102103
The time it takes a neutral allele to become fixed by genetic drift depends on population size; fixation is more rapid in smaller populations.104 The number of individuals in a population is not critica
l, but instead a measure known as the effective population size.105 The effective population is usually smaller than the total population since it takes into account factors such as the level of inbreeding and the stage of the lifecycle in which the population is the smallest.105 The effective population size may not be the same for every gene in the same population.106
It is usually difficult to measure the relative importance of selection and neutral processes, including drift.107 The comparat
ive importance of adaptive and non-adaptive forces in driving evolutionary change is an area of current research.108
Mutation bias is usually conceived as a difference in expected rates for two different kinds of mutation, e.g., transition-transversion bias, GC-AT bias, deletion-insertion bias. This is related to the idea of developmental bias. J. B. S. Haldane109 and Ronald Fisher110 argued that, because mutation is a weak pressure easily overcome by selection, tendencies of mutation would be i
neffectual except under conditions of neutral evolution or extraordinarily high mutation rates. This opposing-pressures argument was long used to dismiss the possibility of internal tendencies in evolution,111 until the molecular era prompted renewed interest in neutral evolution.
Noboru Sueoka112 and Ernst Freese113 proposed that systematic biases in mutation might be responsible for systematic differences in genomic GC composition between species. The identification of a GC-biased E. coli muta
tor strain in 1967,114 along with the proposal of the neutral theory, established the plausibility of mutational explanations for molecular patterns, which are now common in the molecular evolution literature.
For instance, mutation biases are frequently invoked in models of codon usage.115 Such models also include effects of selection, following the mutation-selection-drift model,116 which allows both for mutation biases and differential selection based on effects on translation. Hypotheses of 
mutation bias have played an important role in the development of thinking about the evolution of genome composition, including isochores.117 Different insertion vs. deletion biases in different taxa can lead to the evolution of different genome sizes.118119 The hypothesis of Lynch regarding genome size relies on mutational biases toward increase or decrease in genome size.
However, mutational hypotheses for the evolution of composition suffered a reduction in scope when it was discovered that (
1) GC-biased gene conversion makes an important contribution to composition in diploid organisms such as mammals120 and (2) bacterial genomes frequently have AT-biased mutation.121
Contemporary thinking about the role of mutation biases reflects a different theory from that of Haldane and Fisher. More recent work111 showed that the original "pressures" theory assumes that evolution is based on standing variation: when evolution depends on events of mutation that introduce new alleles, mutational
 and developmental biases in the introduction of variation (arrival biases) can impose biases on evolution without requiring neutral evolution or high mutation rates.111122
Several studies report that the mutations implicated in adaptation reflect common mutation biases123124125 though others dispute this interpretation.126
Recombination allows alleles on the same strand of DNA to become separated. However, the rate of recombination is low . As a result, genes close together on a chromosome may 
not always be shuffled away from each other and genes that are close together tend to be inherited together, a phenomenon known as linkage.127 This tendency is measured by finding how often two alleles occur together on a single chromosome compared to expectations, which is called their linkage disequilibrium. A set of alleles that is usually inherited in a group is called a haplotype. This can be important when one allele in a particular haplotype is strongly beneficial: natural selection can d
rive a selective sweep that will also cause the other alleles in the haplotype to become more common in the population; this effect is called genetic hitchhiking or genetic draft.128 Genetic draft caused by the fact that some neutral genes are genetically linked to others that are under selection can be partially captured by an appropriate effective population size.96
A special case of natural selection is sexual selection, which is selection for any trait that increases mating success by increa
sing the attractiveness of an organism to potential mates.130 Traits that evolved through sexual selection are particularly prominent among males of several animal species. Although sexually favoured, traits such as cumbersome antlers, mating calls, large body size and bright colours often attract predation, which compromises the survival of individual males.131132 This survival disadvantage is balanced by higher reproductive success in males that show these hard-to-fake, sexually selected trait
s.133
Evolution influences every aspect of the form and behaviour of organisms. Most prominent are the specific behavioural and physical adaptations that are the outcome of natural selection. These adaptations increase fitness by aiding activities such as finding food, avoiding predators or attracting mates. Organisms can also respond to selection by cooperating with each other, usually by aiding their relatives or engaging in mutually beneficial symbiosis. In the longer term, evolution produces
 new species through splitting ancestral populations of organisms into new groups that cannot or will not interbreed. These outcomes of evolution are distinguished based on time scale as macroevolution versus microevolution. Macroevolution refers to evolution that occurs at or above the level of species, in particular speciation and extinction, whereas microevolution refers to smaller evolutionary changes within a species or population, in particular shifts in allele frequency and adaptation.135
 Macroevolution is the outcome of long periods of microevolution.136 Thus, the distinction between micro- and macroevolution is not a fundamental one—the difference is simply the time involved.137 However, in macroevolution, the traits of the entire species may be important. For instance, a large amount of variation among individuals allows a species to rapidly adapt to new habitats, lessening the chance of it going extinct, while a wide geographic range increases the chance of speciation, by ma
king it more likely that part of the population will become isolated. In this sense, microevolution and macroevolution might involve selection at different levels—with microevolution acting on genes and organisms, versus macroevolutionary processes such as species selection acting on entire species and affecting their rates of speciation and extinction.138139140
A common misconception is that evolution has goals, long-term plans, or an innate tendency for "progress", as expressed in beliefs such
 as orthogenesis and evolutionism; realistically, however, evolution has no long-term goal and does not necessarily produce greater complexity.141142143 Although complex species have evolved, they occur as a side effect of the overall number of organisms increasing, and simple forms of life still remain more common in the biosphere.144 For example, the overwhelming majority of species are microscopic prokaryotes, which form about half the world's biomass despite their small size145 and constitut
e the vast majority of Earth's biodiversity.146 Simple organisms have therefore been the dominant form of life on Earth throughout its history and continue to be the main form of life up to the present day, with complex life only appearing more diverse because it is more noticeable.147 Indeed, the evolution of microorganisms is particularly important to evolutionary research since their rapid reproduction allows the study of experimental evolution and the observation of evolution and adaptation 
in real time.148149
Adaptation is the process that makes organisms better suited to their habitat.150151 Also, the term adaptation may refer to a trait that is important for an organism's survival. For example, the adaptation of horses' teeth to the grinding of grass. By using the term adaptation for the evolutionary process and adaptive trait for the product (the bodily part or function), the two senses of the word may be distinguished. Adaptations are produced by natural selection.152 The foll
owing definitions are due to Theodosius Dobzhansky:
Adaptation may cause either the gain of a new feature, or the loss of an ancestral feature. An example that shows both types of change is bacterial adaptation to antibiotic selection, with genetic changes causing antibiotic resistance by both modifying the target of the drug, or increasing the activity of transporters that pump the drug out of the cell.156 Other striking examples are the bacteria Escherichia coli evolving the ability to use cit
ric acid as a nutrient in a long-term laboratory experiment,157 Flavobacterium evolving a novel enzyme that allows these bacteria to grow on the by-products of nylon manufacturing,158159 and the soil bacterium Sphingobium evolving an entirely new metabolic pathway that degrades the synthetic pesticide pentachlorophenol.160161 An interesting but still controversial idea is that some adaptations might increase the ability of organisms to generate genetic diversity and adapt by natural selection (i
ncreasing organisms' evolvability).162163164165
Adaptation occurs through the gradual modification of existing structures. Consequently, structures with similar internal organisation may have different functions in related organisms. This is the result of a single ancestral structure being adapted to function in different ways. The bones within bat wings, for example, are very similar to those in mice feet and primate hands, due to the descent of all these structures from a common mammalian ance
stor.167 However, since all living organisms are related to some extent,168 even organs that appear to have little or no structural similarity, such as arthropod, squid and vertebrate eyes, or the limbs and wings of arthropods and vertebrates, can depend on a common set of homologous genes that control their assembly and function; this is called deep homology.169170
During evolution, some structures may lose their original function and become vestigial structures.171 Such structures may have lit
tle or no function in a current species, yet have a clear function in ancestral species, or other closely related species. Examples include pseudogenes,172 the non-functional remains of eyes in blind cave-dwelling fish,173 wings in flightless birds,174 the presence of hip bones in whales and snakes,166 and sexual traits in organisms that reproduce via asexual reproduction.175 Examples of vestigial structures in humans include wisdom teeth,176 the coccyx,171 the vermiform appendix,171 and other b
ehavioural vestiges such as goose bumps177178 and primitive reflexes.179180181
However, many traits that appear to be simple adaptations are in fact exaptations: structures originally adapted for one function, but which coincidentally became somewhat useful for some other function in the process.182 One example is the African lizard Holaspis guentheri, which developed an extremely flat head for hiding in crevices, as can be seen by looking at its near relatives. However, in this species, the hea
d has become so flattened that it assists in gliding from tree to tree—an exaptation.182 Within cells, molecular machines such as the bacterial flagella183 and protein sorting machinery184 evolved by the recruitment of several pre-existing proteins that previously had different functions.135 Another example is the recruitment of enzymes from glycolysis and xenobiotic metabolism to serve as structural proteins called crystallins within the lenses of organisms' eyes.185186
An area of current inves
tigation in evolutionary developmental biology is the developmental basis of adaptations and exaptations.187 This research addresses the origin and evolution of embryonic development and how modifications of development and developmental processes produce novel features.188 These studies have shown that evolution can alter development to produce new structures, such as embryonic bone structures that develop into the jaw in other animals instead forming part of the middle ear in mammals.189 It is
 also possible for structures that have been lost in evolution to reappear due to changes in developmental genes, such as a mutation in chickens causing embryos to grow teeth similar to those of crocodiles.190 It is now becoming clear that most alterations in the form of organisms are due to changes in a small set of conserved genes.191
Interactions between organisms can produce both conflict and cooperation. When the interaction is between pairs of species, such as a pathogen and a host, or a p
redator and its prey, these species can develop matched sets of adaptations. Here, the evolution of one species causes adaptations in a second species. These changes in the second species then, in turn, cause new adaptations in the first species. This cycle of selection and response is called coevolution.192 An example is the production of tetrodotoxin in the rough-skinned newt and the evolution of tetrodotoxin resistance in its predator, the common garter snake. In this predator-prey pair, an e
volutionary arms race has produced high levels of toxin in the newt and correspondingly high levels of toxin resistance in the snake.193
Not all co-evolved interactions between species involve conflict.194 Many cases of mutually beneficial interactions have evolved. For instance, an extreme cooperation exists between plants and the mycorrhizal fungi that grow on their roots and aid the plant in absorbing nutrients from the soil.195 This is a reciprocal relationship as the plants provide the fung
i with sugars from photosynthesis. Here, the fungi actually grow inside plant cells, allowing them to exchange nutrients with their hosts, while sending signals that suppress the plant immune system.196
Coalitions between organisms of the same species have also evolved. An extreme case is the eusociality found in social insects, such as bees, termites and ants, where sterile insects feed and guard the small number of organisms in a colony that are able to reproduce. On an even smaller scale, the
 somatic cells that make up the body of an animal limit their reproduction so they can maintain a stable organism, which then supports a small number of the animal's germ cells to produce offspring. Here, somatic cells respond to specific signals that instruct them whether to grow, remain as they are, or die. If cells ignore these signals and multiply inappropriately, their uncontrolled growth causes cancer.197
Such cooperation within species may have evolved through the process of kin selection
, which is where one organism acts to help raise a relative's offspring.198 This activity is selected for because if the helping individual contains alleles which promote the helping activity, it is likely that its kin will also contain these alleles and thus those alleles will be passed on.199 Other processes that may promote cooperation include group selection, where cooperation provides benefits to a group of organisms.200
Speciation is the process where a species diverges into two or more de
scendant species.201
There are multiple ways to define the concept of "species". The choice of definition is dependent on the particularities of the species concerned.202 For example, some species concepts apply more readily toward sexually reproducing organisms while others lend themselves better toward asexual organisms. Despite the diversity of various species concepts, these various concepts can be placed into one of three broad philosophical approaches: interbreeding, ecological and phyloge
netic.203 The Biological Species Concept (BSC) is a classic example of the interbreeding approach. Defined by evolutionary biologist Ernst Mayr in 1942, the BSC states that "species are groups of actually or potentially interbreeding natural populations, which are reproductively isolated from other such groups."204 Despite its wide and long-term use, the BSC like other species concepts is not without controversy, for example, because genetic recombination among prokaryotes is not an intrinsic as
pect of reproduction;205 this is called the species problem.202 Some researchers have attempted a unifying monistic definition of species, while others adopt a pluralistic approach and suggest that there may be different ways to logically interpret the definition of a species.202203
Barriers to reproduction between two diverging sexual populations are required for the populations to become new species. Gene flow may slow this process by spreading the new genetic variants also to the other popula
tions. Depending on how far two species have diverged since their most recent common ancestor, it may still be possible for them to produce offspring, as with horses and donkeys mating to produce mules.206 Such hybrids are generally infertile. In this case, closely related species may regularly interbreed, but hybrids will be selected against and the species will remain distinct. However, viable hybrids are occasionally formed and these new species can either have properties intermediate between
 their parent species, or possess a totally new phenotype.207 The importance of hybridisation in producing new species of animals is unclear, although cases have been seen in many types of animals,208 with the grey tree frog being a particularly well-studied example.209
Speciation has been observed multiple times under both controlled laboratory conditions and in nature.210 In sexually reproducing organisms, speciation results from reproductive isolation followed by genealogical divergence. Ther
e are four primary geographic modes of speciation. The most common in animals is allopatric speciation, which occurs in populations initially isolated geographically, such as by habitat fragmentation or migration. Selection under these conditions can produce very rapid changes in the appearance and behaviour of organisms.211212 As selection and drift act independently on populations isolated from the rest of their species, separation may eventually produce organisms that cannot interbreed.213
Th
e second mode of speciation is peripatric speciation, which occurs when small populations of organisms become isolated in a new environment. This differs from allopatric speciation in that the isolated populations are numerically much smaller than the parental population. Here, the founder effect causes rapid speciation after an increase in inbreeding increases selection on homozygotes, leading to rapid genetic change.214
The third mode is parapatric speciation. This is similar to peripatric spe
ciation in that a small population enters a new habitat, but differs in that there is no physical separation between these two populations. Instead, speciation results from the evolution of mechanisms that reduce gene flow between the two populations.201 Generally this occurs when there has been a drastic change in the environment within the parental species' habitat. One example is the grass Anthoxanthum odoratum, which can undergo parapatric speciation in response to localised metal pollution 
from mines.215 Here, plants evolve that have resistance to high levels of metals in the soil. Selection against interbreeding with the metal-sensitive parental population produced a gradual change in the flowering time of the metal-resistant plants, which eventually produced complete reproductive isolation. Selection against hybrids between the two populations may cause reinforcement, which is the evolution of traits that promote mating within a species, as well as character displacement, which 
is when two species become more distinct in appearance.216
Finally, in sympatric speciation species diverge without geographic isolation or changes in habitat. This form is rare since even a small amount of gene flow may remove genetic differences between parts of a population.217 Generally, sympatric speciation in animals requires the evolution of both genetic differences and nonrandom mating, to allow reproductive isolation to evolve.218
One type of sympatric speciation involves crossbreeding 
of two related species to produce a new hybrid species. This is not common in animals as animal hybrids are usually sterile. This is because during meiosis the homologous chromosomes from each parent are from different species and cannot successfully pair. However, it is more common in plants because plants often double their number of chromosomes, to form polyploids.219 This allows the chromosomes from each parental species to form matching pairs during meiosis, since each parent's chromosomes 
are represented by a pair already.220 An example of such a speciation event is when the plant species Arabidopsis thaliana and Arabidopsis arenosa crossbred to give the new species Arabidopsis suecica.221 This happened about 20,000 years ago,222 and the speciation process has been repeated in the laboratory, which allows the study of the genetic mechanisms involved in this process.223 Indeed, chromosome doubling within a species may be a common cause of reproductive isolation, as half the double
d chromosomes will be unmatched when breeding with undoubled organisms.224
Speciation events are important in the theory of punctuated equilibrium, which accounts for the pattern in the fossil record of short "bursts" of evolution interspersed with relatively long periods of stasis, where species remain relatively unchanged.225 In this theory, speciation and rapid evolution are linked, with natural selection and genetic drift acting most strongly on organisms undergoing speciation in novel habit
ats or small populations. As a result, the periods of stasis in the fossil record correspond to the parental population and the organisms undergoing speciation and rapid evolution are found in small populations or geographically restricted habitats and therefore rarely being preserved as fossils.139
Extinction is the disappearance of an entire species. Extinction is not an unusual event, as species regularly appear through speciation and disappear through extinction.226 Nearly all animal and pla
nt species that have lived on Earth are now extinct,227 and extinction appears to be the ultimate fate of all species.228 These extinctions have happened continuously throughout the history of life, although the rate of extinction spikes in occasional mass extinction events.229 The Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction event, during which the non-avian dinosaurs became extinct, is the most well-known, but the earlier Permian–Triassic extinction event was even more severe, with approximately 96% of all
 marine species driven to extinction.229 The Holocene extinction event is an ongoing mass extinction associated with humanity's expansion across the globe over the past few thousand years. Present-day extinction rates are 100–1000 times greater than the background rate and up to 30% of current species may be extinct by the mid 21st century.230 Human activities are now the primary cause of the ongoing extinction event;231232 global warming may further accelerate it in the future.233 Despite the e
stimated extinction of more than 99% of all species that ever lived on Earth,234235 about 1trillion species are estimated to be on Earth currently with only one-thousandth of 1% described.236
The role of extinction in evolution is not very well understood and may depend on which type of extinction is considered.229 The causes of the continuous "low-level" extinction events, which form the majority of extinctions, may be the result of competition between species for limited resources (the competi
tive exclusion principle).237 If one species can out-compete another, this could produce species selection, with the fitter species surviving and the other species being driven to extinction.84 The intermittent mass extinctions are also important, but instead of acting as a selective force, they drastically reduce diversity in a nonspecific manner and promote bursts of rapid evolution and speciation in survivors.238
Concepts and models used in evolutionary biology, such as natural selection, hav
e many applications.239
Artificial selection is the intentional selection of traits in a population of organisms. This has been used for thousands of years in the domestication of plants and animals.240 More recently, such selection has become a vital part of genetic engineering, with selectable markers such as antibiotic resistance genes being used to manipulate DNA. Proteins with valuable properties have evolved by repeated rounds of mutation and selection  in a process called directed evoluti
on.241
Understanding the changes that have occurred during an organism's evolution can reveal the genes needed to construct parts of the body, genes which may be involved in human genetic disorders.242 For example, the Mexican tetra is an albino cavefish that lost its eyesight during evolution. Breeding together different populations of this blind fish produced some offspring with functional eyes, since different mutations had occurred in the isolated populations that had evolved in different ca
ves.243 This helped identify genes required for vision and pigmentation.244
Evolutionary theory has many applications in medicine. Many human diseases are not static phenomena, but capable of evolution. Viruses, bacteria, fungi and cancers evolve to be resistant to host immune defences, as well as to pharmaceutical drugs.245246247 These same problems occur in agriculture with pesticide248 and herbicide249 resistance. It is possible that we are facing the end of the effective life of most of avai
lable antibiotics250 and predicting the evolution and evolvability251 of our pathogens and devising strategies to slow or circumvent it is requiring deeper knowledge of the complex forces driving evolution at the molecular level.252
In computer science, simulations of evolution using evolutionary algorithms and artificial life started in the 1960s and were extended with simulation of artificial selection.253 Artificial evolution became a widely recognised optimisation method as a result of the w
ork of Ingo Rechenberg in the 1960s. He used evolution strategies to solve complex engineering problems.254 Genetic algorithms in particular became popular through the writing of John Henry Holland.255 Practical applications also include automatic evolution of computer programmes.256 Evolutionary algorithms are now used to solve multi-dimensional problems more efficiently than software produced by human designers and also to optimise the design of systems.257
The Earth is about 4.54billion years
 old.258259260 The earliest undisputed evidence of life on Earth dates from at least 3.5billion years ago,12261 during the Eoarchean Era after a geological crust started to solidify following the earlier molten Hadean Eon. Microbial mat fossils have been found in 3.48billion-year-old sandstone in Western Australia.141516 Other early physical evidence of a biogenic substance is graphite in 3.7billion-year-old metasedimentary rocks discovered in Western Greenland13 as well as "remains of biotic li
fe" found in 4.1billion-year-old rocks in Western Australia.262263 Commenting on the Australian findings, Stephen Blair Hedges wrote: "If life arose relatively quickly on Earth, then it could be common in the universe."262264 In July 2016, scientists reported identifying a set of 355 genes from the last universal common ancestor (LUCA) of all organisms living on Earth.265
More than 99% of all species, amounting to over five billion species,266 that ever lived on Earth are estimated to be extinct
.234235 Estimates on the number of Earth's current species range from 10million to 14million,267268 of which about 1.9million are estimated to have been named269 and 1.6million documented in a central database to date,270 leaving at least 80% not yet described.
Highly energetic chemistry is thought to have produced a self-replicating molecule around 4billion years ago, and half a billion years later the last common ancestor of all life existed.10 The current scientific consensus is that the comp
lex biochemistry that makes up life came from simpler chemical reactions.271272 The beginning of life may have included self-replicating molecules such as RNA273 and the assembly of simple cells.274
All organisms on Earth are descended from a common ancestor or ancestral gene pool.168275 Current species are a stage in the process of evolution, with their diversity the product of a long series of speciation and extinction events.276 The common descent of organisms was first deduced from four simp
le facts about organisms: First, they have geographic distributions that cannot be explained by local adaptation. Second, the diversity of life is not a set of completely unique organisms, but organisms that share morphological similarities. Third, vestigial traits with no clear purpose resemble functional ancestral traits. Fourth, organisms can be classified using these similarities into a hierarchy of nested groups, similar to a family tree.277
Due to horizontal gene transfer, this "tree of li
fe" may be more complicated than a simple branching tree, since some genes have spread independently between distantly related species.278279 To solve this problem and others, some authors prefer to use the "Coral of life" as a metaphor or a mathematical model to illustrate the evolution of life. This view dates back to an idea briefly mentioned by Darwin but later abandoned.280
Past species have also left records of their evolutionary history. Fossils, along with the comparative anatomy of pres
ent-day organisms, constitute the morphological, or anatomical, record.281 By comparing the anatomies of both modern and extinct species, palaeontologists can infer the lineages of those species. However, this approach is most successful for organisms that had hard body parts, such as shells, bones or teeth. Further, as prokaryotes such as bacteria and archaea share a limited set of common morphologies, their fossils do not provide information on their ancestry.
More recently, evidence for commo
n descent has come from the study of biochemical similarities between organisms. For example, all living cells use the same basic set of nucleotides and amino acids.282 The development of molecular genetics has revealed the record of evolution left in organisms' genomes: dating when species diverged through the molecular clock produced by mutations.283 For example, these DNA sequence comparisons have revealed that humans and chimpanzees share 98% of their genomes and analysing the few areas wher
e they differ helps shed light on when the common ancestor of these species existed.284
Prokaryotes inhabited the Earth from approximately 3–4billion years ago.286287 No obvious changes in morphology or cellular organisation occurred in these organisms over the next few billion years.288 The eukaryotic cells emerged between 1.6 and 2.7billion years ago. The next major change in cell structure came when bacteria were engulfed by eukaryotic cells, in a cooperative association called endosymbiosis.
289290 The engulfed bacteria and the host cell then underwent coevolution, with the bacteria evolving into either mitochondria or hydrogenosomes.291 Another engulfment of cyanobacterial-like organisms led to the formation of chloroplasts in algae and plants.292
The history of life was that of the unicellular eukaryotes, prokaryotes and archaea until around 1.7billion years ago, when multicellular organisms began to appear, with differentiated cells performing specialised functions.293 The evolut
ion of multicellularity occurred in multiple independent events, in organisms as diverse as sponges, brown algae, cyanobacteria, slime moulds and myxobacteria.294 In January 2016, scientists reported that, about 800million years ago, a minor genetic change in a single molecule called GK-PID may have allowed organisms to go from a single cell organism to one of many cells.295
Approximately 538.8million years ago, a remarkable amount of biological diversity appeared over a span of around 10million
 years in what is called the Cambrian explosion. Here, the majority of types of modern animals appeared in the fossil record, as well as unique lineages that subsequently became extinct.296 Various triggers for the Cambrian explosion have been proposed, including the accumulation of oxygen in the atmosphere from photosynthesis.297
About 500million years ago, plants and fungi colonised the land and were soon followed by arthropods and other animals.298 Insects were particularly successful and eve
n today make up the majority of animal species.299 Amphibians first appeared around 364million years ago, followed by early amniotes and birds around 155million years ago (both from "reptile"-like lineages), mammals around 129million years ago, Homininae around 10million years ago and modern humans around 250,000 years ago.300301302 However, despite the evolution of these large animals, smaller organisms similar to the types that evolved early in this process continue to be highly successful and
 dominate the Earth, with the majority of both biomass and species being prokaryotes.146
The proposal that one type of organism could descend from another type goes back to some of the first pre-Socratic Greek philosophers, such as Anaximander and Empedocles.304 Such proposals survived into Roman times. The poet and philosopher Lucretius followed Empedocles in his masterwork De rerum natura (lit.'On the Nature of Things').305306
In contrast to these materialistic views, Aristotelianism had consi
dered all natural things as actualisations of fixed natural possibilities, known as forms.307308 This became part of a medieval teleological understanding of nature in which all things have an intended role to play in a divine cosmic order. Variations of this idea became the standard understanding of the Middle Ages and were integrated into Christian learning, but Aristotle did not demand that real types of organisms always correspond one-for-one with exact metaphysical forms and specifically ga
ve examples of how new types of living things could come to be.309
A number of Arab Muslim scholars wrote about evolution, most notably Ibn Khaldun, who wrote the book Muqaddimah in 1377, in which he asserted that humans developed from "the world of the monkeys", in a process by which "species become more numerous".310
The Scientific Revolution ("New Science") of the 17th century rejected the Aristotelian approach. It sought to explain natural phenomena in terms of physical laws that were the sa
me for all visible things and that did not require the existence of any fixed natural categories or divine cosmic order. However, this new approach was slow to take root in the biological sciences: the last bastion of the concept of fixed natural types. John Ray applied one of the previously more general terms for fixed natural types, "species", to plant and animal types, but he strictly identified each type of living thing as a species and proposed that each species could be defined by the feat
ures that perpetuated themselves generation after generation.311 The biological classification introduced by Carl Linnaeus in 1735 explicitly recognised the hierarchical nature of species relationships, but still viewed species as fixed according to a divine plan.312
Other naturalists of this time speculated on the evolutionary change of species over time according to natural laws. In 1751, Pierre Louis Maupertuis wrote of natural modifications occurring during reproduction and accumulating over
 many generations to produce new species.313 Georges-Louis Leclerc, Comte de Buffon, suggested that species could degenerate into different organisms, and Erasmus Darwin proposed that all warm-blooded animals could have descended from a single microorganism (or "filament").314 The first full-fledged evolutionary scheme was Jean-Baptiste Lamarck's "transmutation" theory of 1809,315 which envisaged spontaneous generation continually producing simple forms of life that developed greater complexity 
in parallel lineages with an inherent progressive tendency, and postulated that on a local level, these lineages adapted to the environment by inheriting changes caused by their use or disuse in parents.316 316317318 These ideas were condemned by established naturalists as speculation lacking empirical support. In particular, Georges Cuvier insisted that species were unrelated and fixed, their similarities reflecting divine design for functional needs. In the meantime, Ray's ideas of benevolent 
design had been developed by William Paley into the Natural Theology or Evidences of the Existence and Attributes of the Deity (1802), which proposed complex adaptations as evidence of divine design and which was admired by Charles Darwin.319320
The crucial break from the concept of constant typological classes or types in biology came with the theory of evolution through natural selection, which was formulated by Charles Darwin and Alfred Wallace in terms of variable populations. Darwin used th
e expression descent with modification rather than evolution.321 Partly influenced by An Essay on the Principle of Population (1798) by Thomas Robert Malthus, Darwin noted that population growth would lead to a "struggle for existence" in which favourable variations prevailed as others perished. In each generation, many offspring fail to survive to an age of reproduction because of limited resources. This could explain the diversity of plants and animals from a common ancestry through the workin
g of natural laws in the same way for all types of organism.322323324325 Darwin developed his theory of "natural selection" from 1838 onwards and was writing up his "big book" on the subject when Alfred Russel Wallace sent him a version of virtually the same theory in 1858. Their separate papers were presented together at an 1858 meeting of the Linnean Society of London.326 At the end of 1859, Darwin's publication of his "abstract" as On the Origin of Species explained natural selection in detai
l and in a way that led to an increasingly wide acceptance of Darwin's concepts of evolution at the expense of alternative theories. Thomas Henry Huxley applied Darwin's ideas to humans, using palaeontology and comparative anatomy to provide strong evidence that humans and apes shared a common ancestry. Some were disturbed by this since it implied that humans did not have a special place in the universe.327
Othniel C. Marsh, America's first palaeontologist, was the first to provide solid fossil 
evidence to support Darwin's theory of evolution by unearthing the ancestors of the modern horse.328 In 1877, Marsh delivered a very influential speech before the annual meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science, providing a demonstrative argument for evolution. For the first time, Marsh traced the evolution of vertebrates from fish all the way through humans. Sparing no detail, he listed a wealth of fossil examples of past life forms. The significance of this speech was
 immediately recognised by the scientific community, and it was printed in its entirety in several scientific journals.329330
In 1880, Marsh caught the attention of the scientific world with the publication of Odontornithes: a Monograph on Extinct Birds of North America, which included his discoveries of birds with teeth. These skeletons helped bridge the gap between dinosaurs and birds, and provided invaluable support for Darwin's theory of evolution.331 Darwin wrote to Marsh saying, "Your work
 on these old birds on the many fossil animals of N. America has afforded the best support to the theory of evolution, which has appeared within the last 20 years" .332333
The mechanisms of reproductive heritability and the origin of new traits remained a mystery. Towards this end, Darwin developed his provisional theory of pangenesis.334 In 1865, Gregor Mendel reported that traits were inherited in a predictable manner through the independent assortment and segregation of elements (later known 
as genes). Mendel's laws of inheritance eventually supplanted most of Darwin's pangenesis theory.335 August Weismann made the important distinction between germ cells that give rise to gametes (such as sperm and egg cells) and the somatic cells of the body, demonstrating that heredity passes through the germ line only. Hugo de Vries connected Darwin's pangenesis theory to Weismann's germ/soma cell distinction and proposed that Darwin's pangenes were concentrated in the cell nucleus and when expr
essed they could move into the cytoplasm to change the cell's structure. De Vries was also one of the researchers who made Mendel's work well known, believing that Mendelian traits corresponded to the transfer of heritable variations along the germline.336 To explain how new variants originate, de Vries developed a mutation theory that led to a temporary rift between those who accepted Darwinian evolution and biometricians who allied with de Vries.337338 In the 1930s, pioneers in the field of po
pulation genetics, such as Ronald Fisher, Sewall Wright and J. B. S. Haldane set the foundations of evolution onto a robust statistical philosophy. The false contradiction between Darwin's theory, genetic mutations, and Mendelian inheritance was thus reconciled.339
In the 1920s and 1930s, the modern synthesis connected natural selection and population genetics, based on Mendelian inheritance, into a unified theory that included random genetic drift, mutation, and gene flow. This new version of e
volutionary theory focused on changes in allele frequencies in population. It explained patterns observed across species in populations, through fossil transitions in palaeontology.339
Since then, further syntheses have extended evolution's explanatory power in the light of numerous discoveries, to cover biological phenomena across the whole of the biological hierarchy from genes to populations.340
The publication of the structure of DNA by James Watson and Francis Crick with contribution of Ros
alind Franklin in 1953 demonstrated a physical mechanism for inheritance.341 Molecular biology improved understanding of the relationship between genotype and phenotype. Advances were also made in phylogenetic systematics, mapping the transition of traits into a comparative and testable framework through the publication and use of evolutionary trees.342 In 1973, evolutionary biologist Theodosius Dobzhansky penned that "nothing in biology makes sense except in the light of evolution", because it 
has brought to light the relations of what first seemed disjointed facts in natural history into a coherent explanatory body of knowledge that describes and predicts many observable facts about life on this planet.343
One extension, known as evolutionary developmental biology and informally called "evo-devo", emphasises how changes between generations (evolution) act on patterns of change within individual organisms (development).237344 Since the beginning of the 21st century, some biologists ha
ve argued for an extended evolutionary synthesis, which would account for the effects of non-genetic inheritance modes, such as epigenetics, parental effects, ecological inheritance and cultural inheritance, and evolvability.345346
In the 19th century, particularly after the publication of On the Origin of Species in 1859, the idea that life had evolved was an active source of academic debate centred on the philosophical, social and religious implications of evolution. Today, the modern evolutio
nary synthesis is accepted by a vast majority of scientists.237 However, evolution remains a contentious concept for some theists.348
While various religions and denominations have reconciled their beliefs with evolution through concepts such as theistic evolution, there are creationists who believe that evolution is contradicted by the creation myths found in their religions and who raise various objections to evolution.135349350 As had been demonstrated by responses to the publication of Vesti
ges of the Natural History of Creation in 1844, the most controversial aspect of evolutionary biology is the implication of human evolution that humans share common ancestry with apes and that the mental and moral faculties of humanity have the same types of natural causes as other inherited traits in animals.351 In some countries, notably the United States, these tensions between science and religion have fuelled the current creation–evolution controversy, a religious conflict focusing on polit
ics and public education.352 While other scientific fields such as cosmology353 and Earth science354 also conflict with literal interpretations of many religious texts, evolutionary biology experiences significantly more opposition from religious literalists.
The teaching of evolution in American secondary school biology classes was uncommon in most of the first half of the 20th century. The Scopes trial decision of 1925 caused the subject to become very rare in American secondary biology textbo
oks for a generation, but it was gradually re-introduced later and became legally protected with the 1968 Epperson v. Arkansas decision. Since then, the competing religious belief of creationism was legally disallowed in secondary school curricula in various decisions in the 1970s and 1980s, but it returned in pseudoscientific form as intelligent design (ID), to be excluded once again in the 2005 Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District case.355 The debate over Darwin's ideas did not generate si
gnificant controversy in China.356

Cell biology, cellular biology, or cytology, is the branch of biology that studies the structure, function, and behavior of the cells.12 All organisms are made of cells. A cell is the basic unit of life that is responsible for the living and functioning of an organism.3 Cell biology encompasses both prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells, with subtopics including the study of cell metabolism, cell communication, cell cycle, biochemistry, and cell composition.
The study of cells is performed using micr
oscopy techniques, cell culture, and cell fractionation. These are used for research into how cells function, which ultimately gives insight into larger organisms. Knowing the components of cells and how cells work is fundamental to all biological sciences and is essential for research in biomedical fields such as cancer, and other diseases. Research in cell biology is interconnected to other fields such as genetics, molecular genetics, molecular biology, medical microbiology, immunology, and cy
tochemistry.
Cells were first seen in 17th-century Europe with the invention of the compound microscope. In 1665, Robert Hooke referred to the building blocks of all living organisms as "cells" (published in Micrographia) after looking at a piece of cork and observing a structure reminiscent of monastic cells;45 however, the cells were dead. They gave no indication to the actual overall components of a cell. A few years later, in 1674, Anton Van Leeuwenhoek was the first to analyze live cells in
 his examination of algae. Many years later, in 1831, Robert Brown discovered the nucleus. All of this preceded the cell theory which states that all living things are made up of cells and that cells are organisms' functional and structural units. This was ultimately concluded by plant scientist Matthias Schleiden5 and animal scientist Theodor Schwann in 1838, who viewed live cells in plant and animal tissue, respectively.3 19 years later, Rudolf Virchow further contributed to the cell theory, a
dding that all cells come from the division of pre-existing cells.3 Viruses are not considered in cell biology – they lack the characteristics of a living cell and instead are studied in the microbiology subclass of virology.6
Cell biology research looks at different ways to culture and manipulate cells outside of a living body to further research in human anatomy and physiology, and to derive medications. The techniques by which cells are studied have evolved. Due to advancements in microscopy,
 techniques and technology have allowed scientists to hold a better understanding of the structure and function of cells. Many techniques commonly used to study cell biology are listed below:7
The scientific branch that studies and diagnoses diseases on the cellular level is called cytopathology. Cytopathology is generally used on samples of free cells or tissue fragments, in contrast to the pathology branch of histopathology, which studies whole tissues. Cytopathology is commonly used to invest
igate diseases involving a wide range of body sites, often to aid in the diagnosis of cancer but also in the diagnosis of some infectious diseases and other inflammatory conditions. For example, a common application of cytopathology is the Pap smear, a screening test used to detect cervical cancer, and precancerous cervical lesions that may lead to cervical cancer.10

Atoms are the basic particles of the chemical elements and the fundamental building blocks of matter. An atom consists of a nucleus of protons and generally neutrons, surrounded by an electromagnetically bound swarm of electrons. The chemical elements are distinguished from each other by the number of protons that are in their atoms. For example, any atom that contains 11 protons is sodium, and any atom that contains 29 protons is copper. Atoms with the same number of protons but a different num
ber of neutrons are called isotopes of the same element.
Atoms are extremely small, typically around 100picometers across. A human hair is about a million carbon atoms wide. Atoms are smaller than the shortest wavelength of visible light, which means humans cannot see atoms with conventional microscopes. They are so small that accurately predicting their behavior using classical physics is not possible due to quantum effects.
More than 99.94% of an atom's mass is in the nucleus.1 Protons have a 
positive electric charge and neutrons have no charge, so the nucleus is positively charged. The electrons are negatively charged, and this opposing charge is what binds them to the nucleus. If the numbers of protons and electrons are equal, as they normally are, then the atom is electrically neutral as a whole. A charged atom is called an ion. If an atom has more electrons than protons, then it has an overall negative charge and is called a negative ion (or anion). Conversely, if it has more pro
tons than electrons, it has a positive charge and is called a positive ion (or cation).
The electrons of an atom are attracted to the protons in an atomic nucleus by the electromagnetic force. The protons and neutrons in the nucleus are attracted to each other by the nuclear force. This force is usually stronger than the electromagnetic force that repels the positively charged protons from one another. Under certain circumstances, the repelling electromagnetic force becomes stronger than the nuc
lear force. In this case, the nucleus splits and leaves behind different elements. This is a form of nuclear decay.
Atoms can attach to one or more other atoms by chemical bonds to form chemical compounds such as molecules or crystals. The ability of atoms to attach and detach from each other is responsible for most of the physical changes observed in nature. Chemistry is the science that studies these changes.
The word atom is derived from the ancient Greek word Atomos,a which means "uncuttable
". However, this ancient idea was based in philosophical reasoning rather than scientific reasoning. Modern atomic theory is not based on these old concepts.23 In the early 19th century, the scientist John Dalton found evidence that matter really is composed of discrete units, and so applied the word atom to those units.4
The basic idea that matter is made up of tiny indivisible particles is an old idea that appeared in many ancient cultures. These ancient ideas were based on philosophical reaso
ning rather than scientific evidence, and modern atomic theory is not based on these old concepts.2 That said, the word atom is derived from the term used by some ancient Greek philosophers, atomos ("uncuttable").
In the early 1800s, John Dalton compiled experimental data gathered by him and other scientists and discovered a pattern now known as the "law of multiple proportions". He noticed that in any group of chemical compounds which all contain two particular chemical elements, the amount of 
Element A per measure of Element B will differ across these compounds by ratios of small whole numbers. This pattern suggested that each element combines with other elements in multiples of a basic unit of weight, with each element having a unit of unique weight. Dalton decided to call these units "atoms".5
Dalton also analyzed iron oxides. There is one type of iron oxide that is a black powder which is 78.1% iron and 21.9% oxygen; and there is another iron oxide that is a red powder which is 70
.4% iron and 29.6% oxygen. Adjusting these figures, in the black powder there is about 28g of oxygen for every 100g of iron, and in the red powder there is about 42g of oxygen for every 100g of iron. 28 and 42 form a ratio of 2:3. Dalton concluded that in these oxides, for every two atoms of iron, there are two or three atoms of oxygen respectively. These substances are known today as iron(II) oxide and iron(III) oxide, and their formulas are FeO and Fe2O3 respectively. Iron(II) oxide's formula 
is normally written as FeO, but since it is a crystalline substance we could alternately write it as Fe2O2, and when we contrast that with Fe2O3, the 2:3 ratio for the oxygen is plain to see.89
As a final example: nitrous oxide is 63.3% nitrogen and 36.7% oxygen, nitric oxide is 44.05% nitrogen and 55.95% oxygen, and nitrogen dioxide is 29.5% nitrogen and 70.5% oxygen. Adjusting these figures, in nitrous oxide there is 80g of oxygen for every 140g of nitrogen, in nitric oxide there is about 160g
 of oxygen for every 140g of nitrogen, and in nitrogen dioxide there is 320g of oxygen for every 140g of nitrogen. 80, 160, and 320 form a ratio of 1:2:4. The respective formulas for these oxides are N2O, NO, and NO2.1011
In 1897, J. J. Thomson discovered that cathode rays can be deflected by electric and magnetic fields, which meant that cathode rays are not a form of light but made of electrically charged particles, and their charge was negative given the direction the particles were deflected
 in.12 He measured these particles to be 1,700 times lighter than hydrogen (the lightest atom).13 He called these new particles corpuscles but they were later renamed electrons since these are the particles that carry electricity.14 Thomson also showed that electrons were identical to particles given off by photoelectric and radioactive materials.15 Thomson explained that an electric current is the passing of electrons from one atom to the next, and when there was no current the electrons embedd
ed themselves in the atoms. This in turn meant that atoms were not indivisible as scientists thought. The atom was composed of electrons whose negative charge was balanced out by some source of positive charge to create an electrically neutral atom. Ions, Thomson explained, must be atoms which have an excess or shortage of electrons.16
The electrons in the atom logically had to be balanced out by a commensurate amount of positive charge, but Thomson had no idea where this positive charge came fr
om, so he tentatively proposed that it was everywhere in the atom, the atom being in the shape of a sphere. This was the mathematically simplest hypothesis to fit the available evidence, or lack thereof. Following from this, Thomson imagined that the balance of electrostatic forces would distribute the electrons throughout the sphere in a more or less even manner.17 Thomson's model is popularly known as the plum pudding model, though neither Thomson nor his colleagues used this analogy.18 Thomso
n's model was incomplete, it was unable to predict any other properties of the elements such as emission spectra and valencies. It was soon rendered obsolete by the discovery of the atomic nucleus.
Between 1908 and 1913, Ernest Rutherford and his colleagues Hans Geiger and Ernest Marsden performed a series of experiments in which they bombarded thin foils of metal with a beam of alpha particles. They did this to measure the scattering patterns of the alpha particles. They spotted a small number 
of alpha particles being deflected by angles greater than 90°. This shouldn't have been possible according to the Thomson model of the atom, whose charges were too diffuse to produce a sufficiently strong electric field. The deflections should have all been negligible. Rutherford proposed that the positive charge of the atom is concentrated in a tiny volume at the center of the atom and that the electrons surround this nucleus in a diffuse cloud. This nucleus carried almost all of the atom's mas
s. Only such an intense concentration of charge, anchored by its high mass, could produce an electric field that could deflect the alpha particles so strongly.19
A problem in classical mechanics is that an accelerating charged particle radiates electromagnetic radiation, causing the particle to lose kinetic energy. Circular motion counts as acceleration, which means that an electron orbiting a central charge should spiral down into that nucleus as it loses speed. In 1913, the physicist Niels Boh
r proposed a new model in which the electrons of an atom were assumed to orbit the nucleus but could only do so in a finite set of orbits, and could jump between these orbits only in discrete changes of energy corresponding to absorption or radiation of a photon.20 This quantization was used to explain why the electrons' orbits are stable and why elements absorb and emit electromagnetic radiation in discrete spectra.21 Bohr's model could only predict the emission spectra of hydrogen, not atoms w
ith more than one electron.
Back in 1815, William Prout observed that the atomic weights of many elements were multiples of hydrogen's atomic weight, which is in fact true for all of them if one takes isotopes into account. In 1898, J. J. Thomson found that the positive charge of a hydrogen ion is equal to the negative charge of an electron, and these were then the smallest known charged particles.22 Thomson later found that the positive charge in an atom is a positive multiple of an electron's 
negative charge.23 In 1913, Henry Moseley discovered that the frequencies of X-ray emissions from an excited atom were a mathematical function of its atomic number and hydrogen's nuclear charge. In 1919, Rutherford bombarded nitrogen gas with alpha particles and detected hydrogen ions being emitted from the gas, and concluded that they were produced by alpha particles hitting and splitting the nuclei of the nitrogen atoms.24
These observations led Rutherford to conclude that the hydrogen nucleus
 is a singular particle with a positive charge equal to the electron's negative charge.25 He named this particle "proton" in 1920.26 The number of protons in an atom  was found to be equal to the element's ordinal number on the periodic table and therefore provided a simple and clear-cut way of distinguishing the elements from each other. The atomic weight of each element is higher than its proton number, so Rutherford hypothesized that the surplus weight was carried by unknown particles with no
 electric charge and a mass equal to that of the proton.
In 1928, Walter Bothe observed that beryllium emitted a highly penetrating, electrically neutral radiation when bombarded with alpha particles. It was later discovered that this radiation could knock hydrogen atoms out of paraffin wax. Initially it was thought to be high-energy gamma radiation, since gamma radiation had a similar effect on electrons in metals, but James Chadwick found that the ionization effect was too strong for it to be 
due to electromagnetic radiation, so long as energy and momentum were conserved in the interaction. In 1932, Chadwick exposed various elements, such as hydrogen and nitrogen, to the mysterious "beryllium radiation", and by measuring the energies of the recoiling charged particles, he deduced that the radiation was actually composed of electrically neutral particles which could not be massless like the gamma ray, but instead were required to have a mass similar to that of a proton. Chadwick now c
laimed these particles as Rutherford's neutrons.29
In 1925, Werner Heisenberg published the first consistent mathematical formulation of quantum mechanics (matrix mechanics).30 One year earlier, Louis de Broglie had proposed that all particles behave like waves to some extent,31 and in 1926 Erwin Schrödinger used this idea to develop the Schrödinger equation, which describes electrons as three-dimensional waveforms rather than points in space.32 A consequence of using waveforms to describe parti
cles is that it is mathematically impossible to obtain precise values for both the position and momentum of a particle at a given point in time. This became known as the uncertainty principle, formulated by Werner Heisenberg in 1927.30 In this concept, for a given accuracy in measuring a position one could only obtain a range of probable values for momentum, and vice versa.33 Thus, the planetary model of the atom was discarded in favor of one that described atomic orbital zones around the nucleu
s where a given electron is most likely to be found.3435 This model was able to explain observations of atomic behavior that previous models could not, such as certain structural and spectral patterns of atoms larger than hydrogen.
Though the word atom originally denoted a particle that cannot be cut into smaller particles, in modern scientific usage the atom is composed of various subatomic particles. The constituent particles of an atom are the electron, the proton, and the neutron.
The electr
on is the least massive of these particles by four orders of magnitude at 9.11×10−31kg, with a negative electrical charge and a size that is too small to be measured using available techniques.36 It was the lightest particle with a positive rest mass measured, until the discovery of neutrino mass. Under ordinary conditions, electrons are bound to the positively charged nucleus by the attraction created from opposite electric charges. Electrons have been known since the late 19th century, mostly 
thanks to J.J. Thomson; see history of subatomic physics for details.
Protons have a positive charge and a mass of 1.6726×10−27kg. The number of protons in an atom is called its atomic number. Ernest Rutherford (1919) observed that nitrogen under alpha-particle bombardment ejects what appeared to be hydrogen nuclei. By 1920, he had accepted that the hydrogen nucleus is a distinct particle within the atom and named it proton.
Neutrons have no electrical charge and have a mass of 1.6749×10−27kg.37
38 Neutrons are the heaviest of the three constituent particles, but their mass can be reduced by the nuclear binding energy. Neutrons and protons (collectively known as nucleons) have comparable dimensions—on the order of 2.5×10−15m—although the 'surface' of these particles is not sharply defined.39 The neutron was discovered in 1932 by the English physicist James Chadwick.
In the Standard Model of physics, electrons are truly elementary particles with no internal structure, whereas protons and
 neutrons are composite particles composed of elementary particles called quarks. There are two types of quarks in atoms, each having a fractional electric charge. Protons are composed of two up quarks ;clip-path:polygon(0px 0px,0px 0px,0px 0px);height:1px;margin:-1px;overflow:hidden;padding:0;position:absolute;width:1px}2/3) and one down quark (with a charge of −1/3). Neutrons consist of one up quark and two down quarks. This distinction accounts for the difference in mass and charge between th
e two particles.4041
The quarks are held together by the strong interaction (or strong force), which is mediated by gluons. The protons and neutrons, in turn, are held to each other in the nucleus by the nuclear force, which is a residuum of the strong force that has somewhat different range-properties . The gluon is a member of the family of gauge bosons, which are elementary particles that mediate physical forces.4041
All the bound protons and neutrons in an atom make up a tiny atomic nucleus,
 and are collectively called nucleons. The radius of a nucleus is approximately equal to
is the total number of nucleons.42 This is much smaller than the radius of the atom, which is on the order of 105fm. The nucleons are bound together by a short-ranged attractive potential called the residual strong force. At distances smaller than 2.5fm this force is much more powerful than the electrostatic force that causes positively charged protons to repel each other.43
Atoms of the same element have th
e same number of protons, called the atomic number. Within a single element, the number of neutrons may vary, determining the isotope of that element. The total number of protons and neutrons determine the nuclide. The number of neutrons relative to the protons determines the stability of the nucleus, with certain isotopes undergoing radioactive decay.44
The proton, the electron, and the neutron are classified as fermions. Fermions obey the Pauli exclusion principle which prohibits identical fer
mions, such as multiple protons, from occupying the same quantum state at the same time. Thus, every proton in the nucleus must occupy a quantum state different from all other protons, and the same applies to all neutrons of the nucleus and to all electrons of the electron cloud.45
A nucleus that has a different number of protons than neutrons can potentially drop to a lower energy state through a radioactive decay that causes the number of protons and neutrons to more closely match. As a result
, atoms with matching numbers of protons and neutrons are more stable against decay, but with increasing atomic number, the mutual repulsion of the protons requires an increasing proportion of neutrons to maintain the stability of the nucleus.45
The number of protons and neutrons in the atomic nucleus can be modified, although this can require very high energies because of the strong force. Nuclear fusion occurs when multiple atomic particles join to form a heavier nucleus, such as through the e
nergetic collision of two nuclei. For example, at the core of the Sun protons require energies of 3 to 10keV to overcome their mutual repulsion—the coulomb barrier—and fuse together into a single nucleus.46 Nuclear fission is the opposite process, causing a nucleus to split into two smaller nuclei—usually through radioactive decay. The nucleus can also be modified through bombardment by high energy subatomic particles or photons. If this modifies the number of protons in a nucleus, the atom chan
ges to a different chemical element.4748
If the mass of the nucleus following a fusion reaction is less than the sum of the masses of the separate particles, then the difference between these two values can be emitted as a type of usable energy , as described by Albert Einstein's mass–energy equivalence formula, E = mc2, where m is the mass loss and c is the speed of light. This deficit is part of the binding energy of the new nucleus, and it is the non-recoverable loss of the energy that causes
 the fused particles to remain together in a state that requires this energy to separate.49
The fusion of two nuclei that create larger nuclei with lower atomic numbers than iron and nickel—a total nucleon number of about 60—is usually an exothermic process that releases more energy than is required to bring them together.50 It is this energy-releasing process that makes nuclear fusion in stars a self-sustaining reaction. For heavier nuclei, the binding energy per nucleon begins to decrease. Tha
t means that a fusion process producing a nucleus that has an atomic number higher than about 26, and a mass number higher than about 60, is an endothermic process. Thus, more massive nuclei cannot undergo an energy-producing fusion reaction that can sustain the hydrostatic equilibrium of a star.45
The electrons in an atom are attracted to the protons in the nucleus by the electromagnetic force. This force binds the electrons inside an electrostatic potential well surrounding the smaller nucleus
, which means that an external source of energy is needed for the electron to escape. The closer an electron is to the nucleus, the greater the attractive force. Hence electrons bound near the center of the potential well require more energy to escape than those at greater separations.
Electrons, like other particles, have properties of both a particle and a wave. The electron cloud is a region inside the potential well where each electron forms a type of three-dimensional standing wave—a wave f
orm that does not move relative to the nucleus. This behavior is defined by an atomic orbital, a mathematical function that characterises the probability that an electron appears to be at a particular location when its position is measured.51 Only a discrete (or quantized) set of these orbitals exist around the nucleus, as other possible wave patterns rapidly decay into a more stable form.52 Orbitals can have one or more ring or node structures, and differ from each other in size, shape and orie
ntation.53
Each atomic orbital corresponds to a particular energy level of the electron. The electron can change its state to a higher energy level by absorbing a photon with sufficient energy to boost it into the new quantum state. Likewise, through spontaneous emission, an electron in a higher energy state can drop to a lower energy state while radiating the excess energy as a photon. These characteristic energy values, defined by the differences in the energies of the quantum states, are resp
onsible for atomic spectral lines.52
The amount of energy needed to remove or add an electron—the electron binding energy—is far less than the binding energy of nucleons. For example, it requires only 13.6eV to strip a ground-state electron from a hydrogen atom,54 compared to 2.23million eV for splitting a deuterium nucleus.55 Atoms are electrically neutral if they have an equal number of protons and electrons. Atoms that have either a deficit or a surplus of electrons are called ions. Electrons
 that are farthest from the nucleus may be transferred to other nearby atoms or shared between atoms. By this mechanism, atoms are able to bond into molecules and other types of chemical compounds like ionic and covalent network crystals.56
By definition, any two atoms with an identical number of protons in their nuclei belong to the same chemical element. Atoms with equal numbers of protons but a different number of neutrons are different isotopes of the same element. For example, all hydrogen 
atoms admit exactly one proton, but isotopes exist with no neutrons , one neutron (deuterium), two neutrons (tritium) and more than two neutrons. The known elements form a set of atomic numbers, from the single-proton element hydrogen up to the 118-proton element oganesson.58 All known isotopes of elements with atomic numbers greater than 82 are radioactive, although the radioactivity of element 83 (bismuth) is so slight as to be practically negligible.5960
About 339 nuclides occur naturally on 
Earth,61 of which 251 (about 74%) have not been observed to decay, and are referred to as "stable isotopes". Only 90 nuclides are stable theoretically, while another 161 (bringing the total to 251) have not been observed to decay, even though in theory it is energetically possible. These are also formally classified as "stable". An additional 35 radioactive nuclides have half-lives longer than 100 million years, and are long-lived enough to have been present since the birth of the Solar System. 
This collection of 286 nuclides are known as primordial nuclides. Finally, an additional 53 short-lived nuclides are known to occur naturally, as daughter products of primordial nuclide decay (such as radium from uranium), or as products of natural energetic processes on Earth, such as cosmic ray bombardment (for example, carbon-14).62note 1
For 80 of the chemical elements, at least one stable isotope exists. As a rule, there is only a handful of stable isotopes for each of these elements, the a
verage being 3.1 stable isotopes per element. Twenty-six "monoisotopic elements" have only a single stable isotope, while the largest number of stable isotopes observed for any element is ten, for the element tin. Elements 43, 61, and all elements numbered 83 or higher have no stable isotopes.631–12
Stability of isotopes is affected by the ratio of protons to neutrons, and also by the presence of certain "magic numbers" of neutrons or protons that represent closed and filled quantum shells. Thes
e quantum shells correspond to a set of energy levels within the shell model of the nucleus; filled shells, such as the filled shell of 50 protons for tin, confers unusual stability on the nuclide. Of the 251 known stable nuclides, only four have both an odd number of protons and odd number of neutrons: hydrogen-2 (deuterium), lithium-6, boron-10, and nitrogen-14.  Also, only four naturally occurring, radioactive odd-odd nuclides have a half-life over a billion years: potassium-40, vanadium-50, 
lanthanum-138, and lutetium-176. Most odd-odd nuclei are highly unstable with respect to beta decay, because the decay products are even-even, and are therefore more strongly bound, due to nuclear pairing effects.64
The large majority of an atom's mass comes from the protons and neutrons that make it up. The total number of these particles (called "nucleons") in a given atom is called the mass number. It is a positive integer and dimensionless (instead of having dimension of mass), because it ex
presses a count. An example of use of a mass number is "carbon-12," which has 12 nucleons (six protons and six neutrons).
The actual mass of an atom at rest is often expressed in daltons (Da), also called the unified atomic mass unit (u). This unit is defined as a twelfth of the mass of a free neutral atom of carbon-12, which is approximately 1.66×10−27kg.65 Hydrogen-1  has an atomic weight of 1.007825Da.66 The value of this number is called the atomic mass. A given atom has an atomic mass appro
ximately equal (within 1%) to its mass number times the dalton , but this number will not be exactly an integer except (by definition) in the case of carbon-12.67 The heaviest stable atom is lead-208,59 with a mass of 207.9766521Da.68
As even the most massive atoms are far too light to work with directly, chemists instead use the unit of moles. One mole of atoms of any element always has the same number of atoms (about 6.022×1023). This number was chosen so that if an element has an atomic mass 
of 1u, a mole of atoms of that element has a mass close to one gram. Because of the definition of the dalton, each carbon-12 atom has an atomic mass of exactly 12Da, and so a mole of carbon-12 atoms weighs exactly 0.012kg.65
Atoms lack a well-defined outer boundary, so their dimensions are usually described in terms of an atomic radius. This is a measure of the distance out to which the electron cloud extends from the nucleus.69 This assumes the atom to exhibit a spherical shape, which is only o
beyed for atoms in vacuum or free space. Atomic radii may be derived from the distances between two nuclei when the two atoms are joined in a chemical bond. The radius varies with the location of an atom on the atomic chart, the type of chemical bond, the number of neighboring atoms (coordination number) and a quantum mechanical property known as spin.70 On the periodic table of the elements, atom size tends to increase when moving down columns, but decrease when moving across rows (left to righ
t).71 Consequently, the smallest atom is helium with a radius of 32pm, while one of the largest is caesium at 225pm.72
When subjected to external forces, like electrical fields, the shape of an atom may deviate from spherical symmetry. The deformation depends on the field magnitude and the orbital type of outer shell electrons, as shown by group-theoretical considerations. Aspherical deviations might be elicited for instance in crystals, where large crystal-electrical fields may occur at low-sym
metry lattice sites.7374 Significant ellipsoidal deformations have been shown to occur for sulfur ions75 and chalcogen ions76 in pyrite-type compounds.
Atomic dimensions are thousands of times smaller than the wavelengths of light (400–700nm) so they cannot be viewed using an optical microscope, although individual atoms can be observed using a scanning tunneling microscope. To visualize the minuteness of the atom, consider that a typical human hair is about 1million carbon atoms in width.77 A s
ingle drop of water contains about 2sextillion (2×1021) atoms of oxygen, and twice the number of hydrogen atoms.78 A single carat diamond with a mass of 2×10−4kg contains about 10sextillion (1022) atoms of carbon.note 2 If an apple were magnified to the size of the Earth, then the atoms in the apple would be approximately the size of the original apple.79
Every element has one or more isotopes that have unstable nuclei that are subject to radioactive decay, causing the nucleus to emit particles 
or electromagnetic radiation. Radioactivity can occur when the radius of a nucleus is large compared with the radius of the strong force, which only acts over distances on the order of 1fm.80
The most common forms of radioactive decay are:8182
Other more rare types of radioactive decay include ejection of neutrons or protons or clusters of nucleons from a nucleus, or more than one beta particle. An analog of gamma emission which allows excited nuclei to lose energy in a different way, is interna
l conversion—a process that produces high-speed electrons that are not beta rays, followed by production of high-energy photons that are not gamma rays. A few large nuclei explode into two or more charged fragments of varying masses plus several neutrons, in a decay called spontaneous nuclear fission.
Each radioactive isotope has a characteristic decay time period—the half-life—that is determined by the amount of time needed for half of a sample to decay. This is an exponential decay process tha
t steadily decreases the proportion of the remaining isotope by 50% every half-life. Hence after two half-lives have passed only 25% of the isotope is present, and so forth.80
Elementary particles possess an intrinsic quantum mechanical property known as spin. This is analogous to the angular momentum of an object that is spinning around its center of mass, although strictly speaking these particles are believed to be point-like and cannot be said to be rotating. Spin is measured in units of the
 reduced Planck constant (ħ), with electrons, protons and neutrons all having spin 12ħ, or "spin-12". In an atom, electrons in motion around the nucleus possess orbital angular momentum in addition to their spin, while the nucleus itself possesses angular momentum due to its nuclear spin.83
The magnetic field produced by an atom—its magnetic moment—is determined by these various forms of angular momentum, just as a rotating charged object classically produces a magnetic field, but the most domin
ant contribution comes from electron spin. Due to the nature of electrons to obey the Pauli exclusion principle, in which no two electrons may be found in the same quantum state, bound electrons pair up with each other, with one member of each pair in a spin up state and the other in the opposite, spin down state. Thus these spins cancel each other out, reducing the total magnetic dipole moment to zero in some atoms with even number of electrons.84
In ferromagnetic elements such as iron, cobalt 
and nickel, an odd number of electrons leads to an unpaired electron and a net overall magnetic moment. The orbitals of neighboring atoms overlap and a lower energy state is achieved when the spins of unpaired electrons are aligned with each other, a spontaneous process known as an exchange interaction. When the magnetic moments of ferromagnetic atoms are lined up, the material can produce a measurable macroscopic field. Paramagnetic materials have atoms with magnetic moments that line up in ran
dom directions when no magnetic field is present, but the magnetic moments of the individual atoms line up in the presence of a field.8485
The nucleus of an atom will have no spin when it has even numbers of both neutrons and protons, but for other cases of odd numbers, the nucleus may have a spin. Normally nuclei with spin are aligned in random directions because of thermal equilibrium, but for certain elements (such as xenon-129) it is possible to polarize a significant proportion of the nucle
ar spin states so that they are aligned in the same direction—a condition called hyperpolarization. This has important applications in magnetic resonance imaging.8687
The potential energy of an electron in an atom is negative relative to when the distance from the nucleus goes to infinity; its dependence on the electron's position reaches the minimum inside the nucleus, roughly in inverse proportion to the distance. In the quantum-mechanical model, a bound electron can occupy only a set of state
s centered on the nucleus, and each state corresponds to a specific energy level; see time-independent Schrödinger equation for a theoretical explanation. An energy level can be measured by the amount of energy needed to unbind the electron from the atom, and is usually given in units of electronvolts (eV). The lowest energy state of a bound electron is called the ground state, i.e., stationary state, while an electron transition to a higher level results in an excited state.88 The electron's en
ergy increases along with n because the (average) distance to the nucleus increases. Dependence of the energy on 3; is caused not by the electrostatic potential of the nucleus, but by interaction between electrons.
For an electron to transition between two different states, e.g. ground state to first excited state, it must absorb or emit a photon at an energy matching the difference in the potential energy of those levels, according to the Niels Bohr model, what can be precisely calculated by th
e Schrödinger equation. Electrons jump between orbitals in a particle-like fashion. For example, if a single photon strikes the electrons, only a single electron changes states in response to the photon; see Electron properties.
The energy of an emitted photon is proportional to its frequency, so these specific energy levels appear as distinct bands in the electromagnetic spectrum.89 Each element has a characteristic spectrum that can depend on the nuclear charge, subshells filled by electrons, 
the electromagnetic interactions between the electrons and other factors.90
When a continuous spectrum of energy is passed through a gas or plasma, some of the photons are absorbed by atoms, causing electrons to change their energy level. Those excited electrons that remain bound to their atom spontaneously emit this energy as a photon, traveling in a random direction, and so drop back to lower energy levels. Thus the atoms behave like a filter that forms a series of dark absorption bands in the
 energy output. An observer viewing the atoms from a view that does not include the continuous spectrum in the background, instead sees a series of emission lines from the photons emitted by the atoms. Spectroscopic measurements of the strength and width of atomic spectral lines allow the composition and physical properties of a substance to be determined.91
Close examination of the spectral lines reveals that some display a fine structure splitting. This occurs because of spin–orbit coupling, w
hich is an interaction between the spin and motion of the outermost electron.92 When an atom is in an external magnetic field, spectral lines become split into three or more components; a phenomenon called the Zeeman effect. This is caused by the interaction of the magnetic field with the magnetic moment of the atom and its electrons. Some atoms can have multiple electron configurations with the same energy level, which thus appear as a single spectral line. The interaction of the magnetic field
 with the atom shifts these electron configurations to slightly different energy levels, resulting in multiple spectral lines.93 The presence of an external electric field can cause a comparable splitting and shifting of spectral lines by modifying the electron energy levels, a phenomenon called the Stark effect.94
If a bound electron is in an excited state, an interacting photon with the proper energy can cause stimulated emission of a photon with a matching energy level. For this to occur, the
 electron must drop to a lower energy state that has an energy difference matching the energy of the interacting photon. The emitted photon and the interacting photon then move off in parallel and with matching phases. That is, the wave patterns of the two photons are synchronized. This physical property is used to make lasers, which can emit a coherent beam of light energy in a narrow frequency band.95
Valency is the combining power of an element. It is determined by the number of bonds it can 
form to other atoms or groups.96 The outermost electron shell of an atom in its uncombined state is known as the valence shell, and the electrons in
that shell are called valence electrons. The number of valence electrons determines the bonding
behavior with other atoms. Atoms tend to chemically react with each other in a manner that fills (or empties) their outer valence shells.97 For example, a transfer of a single electron between atoms is a useful approximation for bonds that form between at
oms with one-electron more than a filled shell, and others that are one-electron short of a full shell, such as occurs in the compound sodium chloride and other chemical ionic salts. Many elements display multiple valences, or tendencies to share differing numbers of electrons in different compounds. Thus, chemical bonding between these elements takes many forms of electron-sharing that are more than simple electron transfers. Examples include the element carbon and the organic compounds.98
The 
chemical elements are often displayed in a periodic table that is laid out to display recurring chemical properties, and elements with the same number of valence electrons form a group that is aligned in the same column of the table.  The elements at the far right of the table have their outer shell completely filled with electrons, which results in chemically inert elements known as the noble gases.99100
Quantities of atoms are found in different states of matter that depend on the physical con
ditions, such as temperature and pressure. By varying the conditions, materials can transition between solids, liquids, gases, and plasmas.101 Within a state, a material can also exist in different allotropes. An example of this is solid carbon, which can exist as graphite or diamond.102 Gaseous allotropes exist as well, such as dioxygen and ozone.
At temperatures close to absolute zero, atoms can form a Bose–Einstein condensate, at which point quantum mechanical effects, which are normally only
 observed at the atomic scale, become apparent on a macroscopic scale.103104 This super-cooled collection of atoms then behaves as a single super atom, which may allow fundamental checks of quantum mechanical behavior.105
While atoms are too small to be seen, devices such as the scanning tunneling microscope (STM) enable their visualization at the surfaces of solids. The microscope uses the quantum tunneling phenomenon, which allows particles to pass through a barrier that would be insurmountabl
e in the classical perspective. Electrons tunnel through the vacuum between two biased electrodes, providing a tunneling current that is exponentially dependent on their separation. One electrode is a sharp tip ideally ending with a single atom. At each point of the scan of the surface the tip's height is adjusted so as to keep the tunneling current at a set value. How much the tip moves to and away from the surface is interpreted as the height profile. For low bias, the microscope images the av
eraged electron orbitals across closely packed energy levels—the local density of the electronic states near the Fermi level.106107 Because of the distances involved, both electrodes need to be extremely stable; only then periodicities can be observed that correspond to individual atoms. The method alone is not chemically specific, and cannot identify the atomic species present at the surface.
Atoms can be easily identified by their mass. If an atom is ionized by removing one of its electrons, i
ts trajectory when it passes through a magnetic field will bend. The radius by which the trajectory of a moving ion is turned by the magnetic field is determined by the mass of the atom. The mass spectrometer uses this principle to measure the mass-to-charge ratio of ions. If a sample contains multiple isotopes, the mass spectrometer can determine the proportion of each isotope in the sample by measuring the intensity of the different beams of ions. Techniques to vaporize atoms include inductive
ly coupled plasma atomic emission spectroscopy and inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry, both of which use a plasma to vaporize samples for analysis.108
The atom-probe tomograph has sub-nanometer resolution in 3-D and can chemically identify individual atoms using time-of-flight mass spectrometry.109
Electron emission techniques such as X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and Auger electron spectroscopy (AES), which measure the binding energies of the core electrons, are used to ident
ify the atomic species present in a sample in a non-destructive way. With proper focusing both can be made area-specific. Another such method is electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS), which measures the energy loss of an electron beam within a transmission electron microscope when it interacts with a portion of a sample.
Spectra of excited states can be used to analyze the atomic composition of distant stars. Specific light wavelengths contained in the observed light from stars can be separat
ed out and related to the quantized transitions in free gas atoms. These colors can be replicated using a gas-discharge lamp containing the same element.110 Helium was discovered in this way in the spectrum of the Sun 23years before it was found on Earth.111
Baryonic matter forms about 4% of the total energy density of the observable universe, with an average density of about 0.25particles/m3 (mostly protons and electrons).112 Within a galaxy such as the Milky Way, particles have a much higher c
oncentration, with the density of matter in the interstellar medium (ISM) ranging from 105 to 109 atoms/m3.113 The Sun is believed to be inside the Local Bubble, so the density in the solar neighborhood is only about 103 atoms/m3.114 Stars form from dense clouds in the ISM, and the evolutionary processes of stars result in the steady enrichment of the ISM with elements more massive than hydrogen and helium.
Up to 95% of the Milky Way's baryonic matter are concentrated inside stars, where conditi
ons are unfavorable for atomic matter. The total baryonic mass is about 10% of the mass of the galaxy;115 the remainder of the mass is an unknown dark matter.116 High temperature inside stars makes most "atoms" fully ionized, that is, separates all electrons from the nuclei. In stellar remnants—with exception of their surface layers—an immense pressure make electron shells impossible.
Electrons are thought to exist in the Universe since early stages of the Big Bang. Atomic nuclei forms in nucleo
synthesis reactions. In about three minutes Big Bang nucleosynthesis produced most of the helium, lithium, and deuterium in the Universe, and perhaps some of the beryllium and boron.117118119
Ubiquitousness and stability of atoms relies on their binding energy, which means that an atom has a lower energy than an unbound system of the nucleus and electrons. Where the temperature is much higher than ionization potential, the matter exists in the form of plasma—a gas of positively charged ions (pos
sibly, bare nuclei) and electrons. When the temperature drops below the ionization potential, atoms become statistically favorable. Atoms (complete with bound electrons) became to dominate over charged particles 380,000years after the Big Bang—an epoch called recombination, when the expanding Universe cooled enough to allow electrons to become attached to nuclei.120
Since the Big Bang, which produced no carbon or heavier elements, atomic nuclei have been combined in stars through the process of 
nuclear fusion to produce more of the element helium, and (via the triple-alpha process) the sequence of elements from carbon up to iron;121 see stellar nucleosynthesis for details.
Isotopes such as lithium-6, as well as some beryllium and boron are generated in space through cosmic ray spallation.122 This occurs when a high-energy proton strikes an atomic nucleus, causing large numbers of nucleons to be ejected.
Elements heavier than iron were produced in supernovae and colliding neutron stars 
through the r-process, and in AGB stars through the s-process, both of which involve the capture of neutrons by atomic nuclei.123 Elements such as lead formed largely through the radioactive decay of heavier elements.124
Most of the atoms that make up the Earth and its inhabitants were present in their current form in the nebula that collapsed out of a molecular cloud to form the Solar System. The rest are the result of radioactive decay, and their relative proportion can be used to determine th
e age of the Earth through radiometric dating.125126 Most of the helium in the crust of the Earth  is a product of alpha decay.127
There are a few trace atoms on Earth that were not present at the beginning (i.e., not "primordial"), nor are results of radioactive decay. Carbon-14 is continuously generated by cosmic rays in the atmosphere.128 Some atoms on Earth have been artificially generated either deliberately or as by-products of nuclear reactors or explosions.129130 Of the transuranic eleme
nts—those with atomic numbers greater than 92—only plutonium and neptunium occur naturally on Earth.131132 Transuranic elements have radioactive lifetimes shorter than the current age of the Earth133 and thus identifiable quantities of these elements have long since decayed, with the exception of traces of plutonium-244 possibly deposited by cosmic dust.125 Natural deposits of plutonium and neptunium are produced by neutron capture in uranium ore.134
The Earth contains approximately 1.33×1050 at
oms.135 Although small numbers of independent atoms of noble gases exist, such as argon, neon, and helium, 99% of the atmosphere is bound in the form of molecules, including carbon dioxide and diatomic oxygen and nitrogen. At the surface of the Earth, an overwhelming majority of atoms combine to form various compounds, including water, salt, silicates, and oxides. Atoms can also combine to create materials that do not consist of discrete molecules, including crystals and liquid or solid metals.1
36137 This atomic matter forms networked arrangements that lack the particular type of small-scale interrupted order associated with molecular matter.138
All nuclides with atomic numbers higher than 82 (lead) are known to be radioactive. No nuclide with an atomic number exceeding 92 (uranium) exists on Earth as a primordial nuclide, and heavier elements generally have shorter half-lives. Nevertheless, an "island of stability" encompassing relatively long-lived isotopes of superheavy elements139 
with atomic numbers 110 to 114 might exist.140 Predictions for the half-life of the most stable nuclide on the island range from a few minutes to millions of years.141 In any case, superheavy elements (with Z104) would not exist due to increasing Coulomb repulsion  in the absence of any stabilizing effects.142
Each particle of matter has a corresponding antimatter particle with the opposite electrical charge. Thus, the positron is a positively charged antielectron and the antiproton is a negativ
ely charged equivalent of a proton. When a matter and corresponding antimatter particle meet, they annihilate each other. Because of this, along with an imbalance between the number of matter and antimatter particles, the latter are rare in the universe. The first causes of this imbalance are not yet fully understood, although theories of baryogenesis may offer an explanation. As a result, no antimatter atoms have been discovered in nature.143144 In 1996, the antimatter counterpart of the hydrog
en atom (antihydrogen) was synthesized at the CERN laboratory in Geneva.145146
Other exotic atoms have been created by replacing one of the protons, neutrons or electrons with other particles that have the same charge. For example, an electron can be replaced by a more massive muon, forming a muonic atom. These types of atoms can be used to test fundamental predictions of physics.147148149

Electricity is the set of physical phenomena associated with the presence and motion of matter possessing an electric charge. Electricity is related to magnetism, both being part of the phenomenon of electromagnetism, as described by Maxwell's equations. Common phenomena are related to electricity, including lightning, static electricity, electric heating, electric discharges and many others.
The presence of either a positive or negative electric charge produces an electric field. The motion of 
electric charge carriers is an electric current and produces a magnetic field. In most applications, Coulomb's law determines the force acting on an electrically charged particle. Electric potential is the work done to move an electric charge from one position to another within an electric field, typically measured in volts.
Electricity plays a central role in many modern technologies, serving in electric power where electric current is used to energise equipment, and in electronics dealing with
 electrical circuits involving active components such as vacuum tubes, transistors, diodes and integrated circuits, and associated passive interconnection technologies.
The study of electrical phenomena dates back to antiquity, with theoretical understanding progressing slowly until the 17th and 18th centuries. The development of the theory of electromagnetism in the 19th century marked significant progress, leading to electricity's industrial and residential application by electrical engineers 
by the century's end. This rapid expansion in electrical technology at the time was the driving force behind the Second Industrial Revolution, with electricity's versatility driving transformations in both industry and society. Electricity is integral to applications spanning transport, heating/cooling, lighting, communications, and computation, making it the foundation of modern industrial society.1
Long before any knowledge of electricity existed, people were aware of shocks from electric fish
. Ancient Egyptian texts dating from 2750 BCE described them as the "protectors" of all other fish. Electric fish were again reported millennia later by ancient Greek, Roman and Arab naturalists and physicians.2 Several ancient writers, such as Pliny the Elder and Scribonius Largus, attested to the numbing effect of electric shocks delivered by electric catfish and electric rays, and knew that such shocks could travel along conducting objects.3 Patients with ailments such as gout or headache wer
e directed to touch electric fish in the hope that the powerful jolt might cure them.4
Ancient cultures around the Mediterranean knew that certain objects, such as rods of amber, could be rubbed with cat's fur to attract light objects like feathers. Thales of Miletus made a series of observations on static electricity around 600 BCE, from which he believed that friction rendered amber magnetic, in contrast to minerals such as magnetite, which needed no rubbing.5678 Thales was incorrect in believ
ing the attraction was due to a magnetic effect, but later science would prove a link between magnetism and electricity.9
Electricity would remain little more than an intellectual curiosity for millennia until 1600, when the English scientist William Gilbert wrote DeMagnete, in which he made a careful study of electricity and magnetism, distinguishing the lodestone effect from static electricity produced by rubbing amber.5 He coined the Neo-Latin word electricus  to refer to the property of attr
acting small objects after being rubbed.10 This association gave rise to the English words "electric" and "electricity", which made their first appearance in print in Thomas Browne's Pseudodoxia Epidemica of 1646.11 Isaac Newton made early investigations into electricity,12 with an idea of his written down in his book Opticks arguably the beginning of the field theory of the electric force.13
Further work was conducted in the 17th and early 18th centuries by Otto von Guericke, Robert Boyle, Step
hen Gray and C. F. du Fay.14 Later in the 18th century, Benjamin Franklin conducted extensive research in electricity, selling his possessions to fund his work. In June 1752 he is reputed to have attached a metal key to the bottom of a dampened kite string and flown the kite in a storm-threatened sky.15 A succession of sparks jumping from the key to the back of his hand showed that lightning was indeed electrical in nature.16 He also explained the apparently paradoxical behaviour17 of the Leyden
 jar as a device for storing large amounts of electrical charge in terms of electricity consisting of both positive and negative charges.14
In 1775, Hugh Williamson reported a series of experiments to the Royal Society on the shocks delivered by the electric eel;18 that same year the surgeon and anatomist John Hunter described the structure of the fish's electric organs.1920 In 1791, Luigi Galvani published his discovery of bioelectromagnetics, demonstrating that electricity was the medium by wh
ich neurons passed signals to the muscles.212214 Alessandro Volta's battery, or voltaic pile, of 1800, made from alternating layers of zinc and copper, provided scientists with a more reliable source of electrical energy than the electrostatic machines previously used.2122 The recognition of electromagnetism, the unity of electric and magnetic phenomena, is due to Hans Christian Ørsted and André-Marie Ampère in 1819–1820. Michael Faraday invented the electric motor in 1821, and Georg Ohm mathema
tically analysed the electrical circuit in 1827.22 Electricity and magnetism (and light) were definitively linked by James Clerk Maxwell, in particular in his "On Physical Lines of Force" in 1861 and 1862.23148
While the early 19th century had seen rapid progress in electrical science, the late 19th century would see the greatest progress in electrical engineering. Through such people as Alexander Graham Bell, Ottó Bláthy, Thomas Edison, Galileo Ferraris, Oliver Heaviside, Ányos Jedlik, William 
Thomson, 1st Baron Kelvin, Charles Algernon Parsons, Werner von Siemens, Joseph Swan, Reginald Fessenden, Nikola Tesla and George Westinghouse, electricity turned from a scientific curiosity into an essential tool for modern life.24
In 1887, Heinrich Hertz25843–4426 discovered that electrodes illuminated with ultraviolet light create electric sparks more easily. In 1905, Albert Einstein published a paper that explained experimental data from the photoelectric effect as being the result of light 
energy being carried in discrete quantized packets, energising electrons. This discovery led to the quantum revolution. Einstein was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1921 for "his discovery of the law of the photoelectric effect".27 The photoelectric effect is also employed in photocells such as can be found in solar panels.
The first solid-state device was the "cat's-whisker detector" first used in the 1900s in radio receivers. A whisker-like wire is placed lightly in contact with a solid 
crystal (such as a germanium crystal) to detect a radio signal by the contact junction effect.28 In a solid-state component, the current is confined to solid elements and compounds engineered specifically to switch and amplify it. Current flow can be understood in two forms: as negatively charged electrons, and as positively charged electron deficiencies called holes. These charges and holes are understood in terms of quantum physics. The building material is most often a crystalline semiconduct
or.2930
Solid-state electronics came into its own with the emergence of transistor technology. The first working transistor, a germanium-based point-contact transistor, was invented by John Bardeen and Walter Houser Brattain at Bell Labs in 1947,31 followed by the bipolar junction transistor in 1948.32
By modern convention, the charge carried by electrons is defined as negative, and that by protons is positive.33 Before these particles were discovered, Benjamin Franklin had defined a positive ch
arge as being the charge acquired by a glass rod when it is rubbed with a silk cloth.34 A proton by definition carries a charge of exactly 1.602176634×10−19coulombs. This value is also defined as the elementary charge. No object can have a charge smaller than the elementary charge, and any amount of charge an object may carry is a multiple of the elementary charge. An electron has an equal negative charge, i.e. −1.602176634×10−19coulombs. Charge is possessed not just by matter, but also by antim
atter, each antiparticle bearing an equal and opposite charge to its corresponding particle.35
The presence of charge gives rise to an electrostatic force: charges exert a force on each other, an effect that was known, though not understood, in antiquity.25457 A lightweight ball suspended by a fine thread can be charged by touching it with a glass rod that has itself been charged by rubbing with a cloth. If a similar ball is charged by the same glass rod, it is found to repel the first: the char
ge acts to force the two balls apart. Two balls that are charged with a rubbed amber rod also repel each other. However, if one ball is charged by the glass rod, and the other by an amber rod, the two balls are found to attract each other. These phenomena were investigated in the late eighteenth century by Charles-Augustin de Coulomb, who deduced that charge manifests itself in two opposing forms. This discovery led to the well-known axiom: like-charged objects repel and opposite-charged objects
 attract.25
The force acts on the charged particles themselves, hence charge has a tendency to spread itself as evenly as possible over a conducting surface. The magnitude of the electromagnetic force, whether attractive or repulsive, is given by Coulomb's law, which relates the force to the product of the charges and has an inverse-square relation to the distance between them.363735 The electromagnetic force is very strong, second only in strength to the strong interaction,38 but unlike that fo
rce it operates over all distances.39 In comparison with the much weaker gravitational force, the electromagnetic force pushing two electrons apart is 1042 times that of the gravitational attraction pulling them together.40
Charge originates from certain types of subatomic particles, the most familiar carriers of which are the electron and proton. Electric charge gives rise to and interacts with the electromagnetic force, one of the four fundamental forces of nature. Experiment has shown charge 
to be a conserved quantity, that is, the net charge within an electrically isolated system will always remain constant regardless of any changes taking place within that system.41 Within the system, charge may be transferred between bodies, either by direct contact or by passing along a conducting material, such as a wire.372–5 The informal term static electricity refers to the net presence (or 'imbalance') of charge on a body, usually caused when dissimilar materials are rubbed together, transf
erring charge from one to the other.
Charge can be measured by a number of means, an early instrument being the gold-leaf electroscope, which although still in use for classroom demonstrations, has been superseded by the electronic electrometer.372–5
The movement of electric charge is known as an electric current, the intensity of which is usually measured in amperes. Current can consist of any moving charged particles; most commonly these are electrons, but any charge in motion constitutes a cu
rrent. Electric current can flow through some things, electrical conductors, but will not flow through an electrical insulator.42
By historical convention, a positive current is defined as having the same direction of flow as any positive charge it contains, or to flow from the most positive part of a circuit to the most negative part. Current defined in this manner is called conventional current. The motion of negatively charged electrons around an electric circuit, one of the most familiar for
ms of current, is thus deemed positive in the opposite direction to that of the electrons.43 However, depending on the conditions, an electric current can consist of a flow of charged particles in either direction or even in both directions at once. The positive-to-negative convention is widely used to simplify this situation.
The process by which electric current passes through a material is termed electrical conduction, and its nature varies with that of the charged particles and the material 
through which they are travelling. Examples of electric currents include metallic conduction, where electrons flow through a conductor such as metal, and electrolysis, where ions (charged atoms) flow through liquids, or through plasmas such as electrical sparks. While the particles themselves can move quite slowly, sometimes with an average drift velocity only fractions of a millimetre per second,3717 the electric field that drives them itself propagates at close to the speed of light, enabling 
electrical signals to pass rapidly along wires.44
Current causes several observable effects, which historically were the means of recognising its presence. That water could be decomposed by the current from a voltaic pile was discovered by Nicholson and Carlisle in 1800, a process now known as electrolysis. Their work was greatly expanded upon by Michael Faraday in 1833. Current through a resistance causes localised heating, an effect James Prescott Joule studied mathematically in 1840.3723–24 O
ne of the most important discoveries relating to current was made accidentally by Hans Christian Ørsted in 1820, when, while preparing a lecture, he witnessed the current in a wire disturbing the needle of a magnetic compass.23370a He had discovered electromagnetism, a fundamental interaction between electricity and magnetics. The level of electromagnetic emissions generated by electric arcing is high enough to produce electromagnetic interference, which can be detrimental to the workings of adj
acent equipment.45
In engineering or household applications, current is often described as being either direct current (DC) or alternating current (AC). These terms refer to how the current varies in time. Direct current, as produced by example from a battery and required by most electronic devices, is a unidirectional flow from the positive part of a circuit to the negative.4611 If, as is most common, this flow is carried by electrons, they will be travelling in the opposite direction. Alternat
ing current is any current that reverses direction repeatedly; almost always this takes the form of a sine wave.46206–07 Alternating current thus pulses back and forth within a conductor without the charge moving any net distance over time. The time-averaged value of an alternating current is zero, but it delivers energy in first one direction, and then the reverse. Alternating current is affected by electrical properties that are not observed under steady state direct current, such as inductanc
e and capacitance.46223–25 These properties however can become important when circuitry is subjected to transients, such as when first energised.
The concept of the electric field was introduced by Michael Faraday. An electric field is created by a charged body in the space that surrounds it, and results in a force exerted on any other charges placed within the field. The electric field acts between two charges in a similar manner to the way that the gravitational field acts between two masses, 
and like it, extends towards infinity and shows an inverse square relationship with distance.39 However, there is an important difference. Gravity always acts in attraction, drawing two masses together, while the electric field can result in either attraction or repulsion. Since large bodies such as planets generally carry no net charge, the electric field at a distance is usually zero. Thus gravity is the dominant force at distance in the universe, despite being much weaker.40
An electric field
 generally varies in space,b and its strength at any one point is defined as the force (per unit charge) that would be felt by a stationary, negligible charge if placed at that point.25469–70 The conceptual charge, termed a 'test charge', must be vanishingly small to prevent its own electric field disturbing the main field and must also be stationary to prevent the effect of magnetic fields. As the electric field is defined in terms of force, and force is a vector, having both magnitude and dire
ction, it follows that an electric field is a vector field.25469–70
The study of electric fields created by stationary charges is called electrostatics. The field may be visualised by a set of imaginary lines whose direction at any point is the same as that of the field. This concept was introduced by Faraday,47 whose term 'lines of force' still sometimes sees use. The field lines are the paths that a point positive charge would seek to make as it was forced to move within the field; they are ho
wever an imaginary concept with no physical existence, and the field permeates all the intervening space between the lines.47 Field lines emanating from stationary charges have several key properties: first, they originate at positive charges and terminate at negative charges; second, they must enter any good conductor at right angles, and third, they may never cross nor close in on themselves.25479
A hollow conducting body carries all its charge on its outer surface. The field is therefore 0 at
 all places inside the body.3788 This is the operating principle of the Faraday cage, a conducting metal shell that isolates its interior from outside electrical effects.
The principles of electrostatics are important when designing items of high-voltage equipment. There is a finite limit to the electric field strength that may be withstood by any medium. Beyond this point, electrical breakdown occurs and an electric arc causes flashover between the charged parts. Air, for example, tends to arc 
across small gaps at electric field strengths which exceed 30kV per centimetre. Over larger gaps, its breakdown strength is weaker, perhaps 1kV per centimetre.482 The most visible natural occurrence of this is lightning, caused when charge becomes separated in the clouds by rising columns of air, and raises the electric field in the air to greater than it can withstand. The voltage of a large lightning cloud may be as high as 100MV and have discharge energies as great as 250kWh.48201–02
The fiel
d strength is greatly affected by nearby conducting objects, and it is particularly intense when it is forced to curve around sharply pointed objects. This principle is exploited in the lightning conductor, the sharp spike of which acts to encourage the lightning strike to develop there, rather than to the building it serves to protect.49155
The concept of electric potential is closely linked to that of the electric field. A small charge placed within an electric field experiences a force, and t
o have brought that charge to that point against the force requires work. The electric potential at any point is defined as the energy required to bring a unit test charge from an infinite distance slowly to that point. It is usually measured in volts, and one volt is the potential for which one joule of work must be expended to bring a charge of one coulomb from infinity.25494–98 This definition of potential, while formal, has little practical application, and a more useful concept is that of e
lectric potential difference, and is the energy required to move a unit charge between two specified points. The electric field is conservative, which means that the path taken by the test charge is irrelevant: all paths between two specified points expend the same energy, and thus a unique value for potential difference may be stated.25494–98 The volt is so strongly identified as the unit of choice for measurement and description of electric potential difference that the term voltage sees great
er everyday usage.
For practical purposes, defining a common reference point to which potentials may be expressed and compared is useful. While this could be at infinity, a much more useful reference is the Earth itself, which is assumed to be at the same potential everywhere. This reference point naturally takes the name earth or ground. Earth is assumed to be an infinite source of equal amounts of positive and negative charge and is therefore electrically uncharged—and unchargeable.50
Electric
 potential is a scalar quantity. That is, it has only magnitude and not direction. It may be viewed as analogous to height: just as a released object will fall through a difference in heights caused by a gravitational field, so a charge will 'fall' across the voltage caused by an electric field.51 As relief maps show contour lines marking points of equal height, a set of lines marking points of equal potential (known as equipotentials) may be drawn around an electrostatically charged object. The
 equipotentials cross all lines of force at right angles. They must also lie parallel to a conductor's surface, since otherwise there would be a force along the surface of the conductor that would move the charge carriers to even the potential across the surface.
The electric field was formally defined as the force exerted per unit charge, but the concept of potential allows for a more useful and equivalent definition: the electric field is the local gradient of the electric potential. Usually e
xpressed in voltspermetre, the vector direction of the field is the line of greatest slope of potential, and where the equipotentials lie closest together.3760
Ørsted's discovery in 1821 that a magnetic field existed around all sides of a wire carrying an electric current indicated that there was a direct relationship between electricity and magnetism. Moreover, the interaction seemed different from gravitational and electrostatic forces, the two forces of nature then known. The force on the com
pass needle did not direct it to or away from the current-carrying wire, but acted at right angles to it.23370 Ørsted's words were that "the electric conflict acts in a revolving manner." The force also depended on the direction of the current, for if the flow was reversed, then the force did too.52
Ørsted did not fully understand his discovery, but he observed the effect was reciprocal: a current exerts a force on a magnet, and a magnetic field exerts a force on a current. The phenomenon was fu
rther investigated by Ampère, who discovered that two parallel current-carrying wires exerted a force upon each other: two wires conducting currents in the same direction are attracted to each other, while wires containing currents in opposite directions are forced apart.53 The interaction is mediated by the magnetic field each current produces and forms the basis for the international definition of the ampere.53
This relationship between magnetic fields and currents is extremely important, for 
it led to Michael Faraday's invention of the electric motor in 1821. Faraday's homopolar motor consisted of a permanent magnet sitting in a pool of mercury. A current was allowed through a wire suspended from a pivot above the magnet and dipped into the mercury. The magnet exerted a tangential force on the wire, making it circle around the magnet for as long as the current was maintained.54
Experimentation by Faraday in 1831 revealed that a wire moving perpendicular to a magnetic field developed
 a potential difference between its ends. Further analysis of this process, known as electromagnetic induction, enabled him to state the principle, now known as Faraday's law of induction, that the potential difference induced in a closed circuit is proportional to the rate of change of magnetic flux through the loop. Exploitation of this discovery enabled him to invent the first electrical generator in 1831, in which he converted the mechanical energy of a rotating copper disc to electrical ene
rgy.54 Faraday's disc was inefficient and of no use as a practical generator, but it showed the possibility of generating electric power using magnetism, a possibility that would be taken up by those that followed on from his work.55
An electric circuit is an interconnection of electric components such that electric charge is made to flow along a closed path (a circuit), usually to perform some useful task.56
The components in an electric circuit can take many forms, which can include elements s
uch as resistors, capacitors, switches, transformers and electronics. Electronic circuits contain active components, usually semiconductors, and typically exhibit non-linear behaviour, requiring complex analysis. The simplest electric components are those that are termed passive and linear: while they may temporarily store energy, they contain no sources of it, and exhibit linear responses to stimuli.5715–16
The resistor is perhaps the simplest of passive circuit elements: as its name suggests, 
it resists the current through it, dissipating its energy as heat. The resistance is a consequence of the motion of charge through a conductor: in metals, for example, resistance is primarily due to collisions between electrons and ions. Ohm's law is a basic law of circuit theory, stating that the current passing through a resistance is directly proportional to the potential difference across it. The resistance of most materials is relatively constant over a range of temperatures and currents; m
aterials under these conditions are known as 'ohmic'. The ohm, the unit of resistance, was named in honour of Georg Ohm, and is symbolised by the Greek letter Ω. 1Ω is the resistance that will produce a potential difference of one volt in response to a current of one amp.5730–35
The capacitor is a development of the Leyden jar and is a device that can store charge, and thereby storing electrical energy in the resulting field. It consists of two conducting plates separated by a thin insulating di
electric layer; in practice, thin metal foils are coiled together, increasing the surface area per unit volume and therefore the capacitance. The unit of capacitance is the farad, named after Michael Faraday, and given the symbol F: one farad is the capacitance that develops a potential difference of one volt when it stores a charge of one coulomb. A capacitor connected to a voltage supply initially causes a current as it accumulates charge; this current will however decay in time as the capacit
or fills, eventually falling to zero. A capacitor will therefore not permit a steady state current, but instead blocks it.57216–20
The inductor is a conductor, usually a coil of wire, that stores energy in a magnetic field in response to the current through it. When the current changes, the magnetic field does too, inducing a voltage between the ends of the conductor. The induced voltage is proportional to the time rate of change of the current. The constant of proportionality is termed the indu
ctance. The unit of inductance is the henry, named after Joseph Henry, a contemporary of Faraday. One henry is the inductance that will induce a potential difference of one volt if the current through it changes at a rate of one ampere per second. The inductor's behaviour is in some regards converse to that of the capacitor: it will freely allow an unchanging current but opposes a rapidly changing one.57226–29
Electric power is the rate at which electric energy is transferred by an electric circ
uit. The SI unit of power is the watt, one joule per second.
Electric power, like mechanical power, is the rate of doing work, measured in watts, and represented by the letter P. The term wattage is used colloquially to mean "electric power in watts." The electric power in watts produced by an electric current I consisting of a charge of Q coulombs every t seconds passing through an electric potential (voltage) difference of V is
Electric power is generally supplied to businesses and homes by th
e electric power industry. Electricity is usually sold by the kilowatt hour (3.6 MJ) which is the product of power in kilowatts multiplied by running time in hours. Electric utilities measure power using electricity meters, which keep a running total of the electric energy delivered to a customer. Unlike fossil fuels, electricity is a low entropy form of energy and can be converted into motion or many other forms of energy with high efficiency.58
Electronics deals with electrical circuits that i
nvolve active electrical components such as vacuum tubes, transistors, diodes, sensors and integrated circuits, and associated passive interconnection technologies.591–5,71 The nonlinear behaviour of active components and their ability to control electron flows makes digital switching possible,5975 and electronics is widely used in information processing, telecommunications, and signal processing. Interconnection technologies such as circuit boards, electronics packaging technology, and other va
ried forms of communication infrastructure complete circuit functionality and transform the mixed components into a regular working system.59
Today, most electronic devices use semiconductor components to perform electron control. The underlying principles that explain how semiconductors work are studied in solid state physics,60 whereas the design and construction of electronic circuits to solve practical problems are part of electronics engineering.61
Electronic devices make use of the transis
tor, perhaps one of the most important inventions of the twentieth century,62 and a fundamental building block of all modern circuitry. A modern integrated circuit may contain many billions of miniaturised transistors in a region only a few centimetres square.63
Faraday's and Ampère's work showed that a time-varying magnetic field created an electric field, and a time-varying electric field created a magnetic field. Thus, when either field is changing in time, a field of the other is always indu
ced.25696–700 These variations are an electromagnetic wave. Electromagnetic waves were analysed theoretically by James Clerk Maxwell in 1864. Maxwell developed a set of equations that could unambiguously describe the interrelationship between electric field, magnetic field, electric charge, and electric current. He could moreover prove that in a vacuum such a wave would travel at the speed of light, and thus light itself was a form of electromagnetic radiation. Maxwell's equations, which unify l
ight, fields, and charge are one of the great milestones of theoretical physics.25696–700
The work of many researchers enabled the use of electronics to convert signals into high frequency oscillating currents and, via suitably shaped conductors, electricity permits the transmission and reception of these signals via radio waves over very long distances.64
In the 6th century BC the Greek philosopher Thales of Miletus experimented with amber rods: these were the first studies into the production 
of electricity. While this method, now known as the triboelectric effect, can lift light objects and generate sparks, it is extremely inefficient.65 It was not until the invention of the voltaic pile in the eighteenth century that a viable source of electricity became available. The voltaic pile, and its modern descendant, the electrical battery, store energy chemically and make it available on demand in the form of electricity.65
Electrical power is usually generated by electro-mechanical gener
ators. These can be driven by steam produced from fossil fuel combustion or the heat released from nuclear reactions, but also more directly from the kinetic energy of wind or flowing water. The steam turbine invented by Sir Charles Parsons in 1884 is still used to convert the thermal energy of steam into a rotary motion that can be used by electro-mechanical generators. Such generators bear no resemblance to Faraday's homopolar disc generator of 1831, but they still rely on his electromagnetic 
principle that a conductor linking a changing magnetic field induces a potential difference across its ends.66 Electricity generated by solar panels rely on a different mechanism: solar radiation is converted directly into electricity using the photovoltaic effect.67
Demand for electricity grows with great rapidity as a nation modernises and its economy develops.68 The United States showed a 12% increase in demand during each year of the first three decades of the twentieth century,69 a rate of 
growth that is now being experienced by emerging economies such as those of India or China.7071
Environmental concerns with electricity generation, in particular the contribution of fossil fuel burning to climate change, have led to an increased focus on generation from renewable sources. In the power sector, wind and solar have become cost-effective, speeding up an energy transition away from fossil fuels.72
The invention in the late nineteenth century of the transformer meant that electrical p
ower could be transmitted more efficiently at a higher voltage but lower current. Efficient electrical transmission meant in turn that electricity could be generated at centralised power stations, where it benefited from economies of scale, and then be despatched relatively long distances to where it was needed.7374
Normally, demand for electricity must match the supply, as storage of electricity is difficult.73 A certain amount of generation must always be held in reserve to cushion an electric
al grid against inevitable disturbances and losses.75 With increasing levels of variable renewable energy (wind and solar energy) in the grid, it has become more challenging to match supply and demand. Storage plays an increasing role in bridging that gap. There are four types of energy storage technologies, each in varying states of technology readiness: batteries (electrochemical storage), chemical storage such as hydrogen, thermal or mechanical (such as pumped hydropower).76
Electricity is a 
very convenient way to transfer energy, and it has been adapted to a huge, and growing, number of uses.77 The invention of a practical incandescent light bulb in the 1870s led to lighting becoming one of the first publicly available applications of electrical power. Although electrification brought with it its own dangers, replacing the naked flames of gas lighting greatly reduced fire hazards within homes and factories.78 Public utilities were set up in many cities targeting the burgeoning mark
et for electrical lighting. In the late 20th century and in modern times, the trend has started to flow in the direction of deregulation in the electrical power sector.79
The resistive Joule heating effect employed in filament light bulbs also sees more direct use in electric heating. While this is versatile and controllable, it can be seen as wasteful, since most electrical generation has already required the production of heat at a power station.80 A number of countries, such as Denmark, have 
issued legislation restricting or banning the use of resistive electric heating in new buildings.81 Electricity is however still a highly practical energy source for heating and refrigeration,82 with air conditioning/heat pumps representing a growing sector for electricity demand for heating and cooling, the effects of which electricity utilities are increasingly obliged to accommodate.8384 Electrification is expected to play a major role in the decarbonisation of sectors that rely on direct fos
sil fuel burning, such as transport (using electric vehicles) and heating (using heat pumps).8586
The effects of electromagnetism are most visibly employed in the electric motor, which provides a clean and efficient means of motive power. A stationary motor such as a winch is easily provided with a supply of power, but a motor that moves with its application, such as an electric vehicle, is obliged to either carry along a power source such as a battery or to collect current from a sliding contac
t such as a pantograph. Electrically powered vehicles are used in public transportation, such as electric buses and trains,87 and electric cars.88
Electricity is used within telecommunications, and electrical telegraphs. With the construction of transcontinental, and transatlantic telegraph systems in the 1860s, electricity had enabled communications in minutes across the globe.
A voltage applied to a human body causes an electric current through the tissues, and although the relationship is non
-linear, the greater the voltage, the greater the current.89 The threshold for perception varies with the supply frequency and with the path of the current, but is about 0.1mA to 1mA for mains-frequency electricity, though a current as low as a microamp can be detected as an electrovibration effect under certain conditions.90 If the current is sufficiently high, it will cause muscle contraction, fibrillation of the heart, and tissue burns.89 The lack of any visible sign that a conductor is elect
rified makes electricity a particular hazard. The pain caused by an electric shock can be intense, leading electricity at times to be employed as a method of torture.91 Death caused by an electric shock—electrocution—is still used for judicial execution in some US states, though its use had become very rare by the end of the 20th century.92
Electricity is not a human invention, and may be observed in several forms in nature, notably lightning. Many interactions familiar at the macroscopic level,
 such as touch, friction or chemical bonding, are due to interactions between electric fields on the atomic scale. The Earth's magnetic field is due to the natural dynamo of circulating currents in the planet's core.93 Certain crystals, such as quartz, or even sugar, generate a potential difference across their faces when pressed.94 This phenomenon is known as piezoelectricity, from the Greek piezein (πιέζειν), meaning to press, and was discovered in 1880 by Pierre and Jacques Curie. The effect 
is reciprocal: when a piezoelectric material is subjected to an electric field it changes size slightly.94
Some organisms, such as sharks, are able to detect and respond to changes in electric fields, an ability known as electroreception,95 while others, termed electrogenic, are able to generate voltages themselves to serve as a predatory or defensive weapon; these are electric fish in different orders.3 The order Gymnotiformes, of which the best-known example is the electric eel, detect or stun
 their prey via high voltages generated from modified muscle cells called electrocytes.34 All animals transmit information along their cell membranes with voltage pulses called action potentials, whose functions include communication by the nervous system between neurons and muscles.96 An electric shock stimulates this system and causes muscles to contract.97 Action potentials are also responsible for coordinating activities in certain plants.96
It is said that in the 1850s, British politician W
illiam Ewart Gladstone asked the scientist Michael Faraday why electricity was valuable. Faraday answered, "One day sir, you may tax it."9899100 However, according to Snopes.com "the anecdote should be considered apocryphal because it isn't mentioned in any accounts by Faraday or his contemporaries (letters, newspapers, or biographies) and only popped up well after Faraday's death."101
In the 19th and early 20th centuries, electricity was not part of the everyday life of many people, even in the
 industrialised Western world. The popular culture of the time accordingly often depicted it as a mysterious, quasi-magical force that can slay the living, revive the dead or otherwise bend the laws of nature.10269 This attitude began with the 1771 experiments of Luigi Galvani in which the legs of dead frogs were shown to twitch on application of animal electricity. "Revitalization" or resuscitation of apparently dead or drowned persons was reported in the medical literature shortly after Galvan
i's work. These results were known to Mary Shelley when she authored Frankenstein (1819), although she does not name the method of revitalization of the monster. The revitalization of monsters with electricity later became a stock theme in horror films.citation needed
As public familiarity with electricity as the lifeblood of the Second Industrial Revolution grew, its wielders were more often cast in a positive light,10271 such as the workers who "finger death at their gloves' end as they piece 
and repiece the living wires" in Rudyard Kipling's 1907 poem Sons of Martha.10271 Electrically powered vehicles of every sort featured large in adventure stories such as those of Jules Verne and the Tom Swift books.10271 The masters of electricity, whether fictional or real—including scientists such as Thomas Edison, Charles Steinmetz or Nikola Tesla—were popularly conceived of as having wizard-like powers.10271
With electricity ceasing to be a novelty and becoming a necessity of everyday life i
n the later half of the 20th century, it acquired particular attention by popular culture only when it stops flowing,10271 an event that usually signals disaster.10271 The people who keep it flowing, such as the nameless hero of Jimmy Webb's song "Wichita Lineman" (1968),10271 are still often cast as heroic, wizard-like figures.10271

Magnetism is the class of physical attributes that occur through a magnetic field, which allows objects to attract or repel each other. Because both electric currents and magnetic moments of elementary particles give rise to a magnetic field, magnetism is one of two aspects of electromagnetism.
The familiar effects occur in ferromagnetic materials, which are strongly attracted by magnetic fields and can be magnetized to become permanent magnets, producing magnetic fields themselves. Demagnetizin
g a magnet is also possible. Only a few substances are ferromagnetic; the most common ones are iron, cobalt, nickel, and their alloys.
All substances exhibit some type of magnetism. Magnetic materials are classified according to their bulk susceptibility.1 Ferromagnetism is responsible for most of the effects of magnetism encountered in everyday life, but there are actually several types of magnetism. Paramagnetic substances, such as aluminium and oxygen, are weakly attracted to an applied magne
tic field; diamagnetic substances, such as copper and carbon, are weakly repelled; while antiferromagnetic materials, such as chromium, have a more complex relationship with a magnetic field.vague The force of a magnet on paramagnetic, diamagnetic, and antiferromagnetic materials is usually too weak to be felt and can be detected only by laboratory instruments, so in everyday life, these substances are often described as non-magnetic.
The strength of a magnetic field always decreases with distan
ce from the magnetic source,2 though the exact mathematical relationship between strength and distance varies. Many factors can influence the magnetic field of an object including the magnetic moment of the material, the physical shape of the object, both the magnitude and direction of any electric current present within the object, and the temperature of the object.
Magnetism was first discovered in the ancient world when people noticed that lodestones, naturally magnetized pieces of the minera
l magnetite, could attract iron.3 The word magnet comes from the Greek term μαγνῆτις λίθος magnētis lithos,4 "the Magnesian stone, lodestone".5 In ancient Greece, Aristotle attributed the first of what could be called a scientific discussion of magnetism to the philosopher Thales of Miletus, who lived from about 625BCE to about 545BCE.6 The ancient Indian medical text Sushruta Samhita describes using magnetite to remove arrows embedded in a person's body.7
In ancient China, the earliest literary
 reference to magnetism lies in a 4th-century BCE book named after its author, Guiguzi.8
The 2nd-century BCE annals, Lüshi Chunqiu, also notes:
"The lodestone makes iron approach; some (force) is attracting it."9
The earliest mention of the attraction of a needle is in a 1st-century work Lunheng (Balanced Inquiries): "A lodestone attracts a needle."10
The 11th-century Chinese scientist Shen Kuo was the first person to write—in the Dream Pool Essays—of the magnetic needle compass and that it impr
oved the accuracy of navigation by employing the astronomical concept of true north.
By the 12th century, the Chinese were known to use the lodestone compass for navigation. They sculpted a directional spoon from lodestone in such a way that the handle of the spoon always pointed south.
Alexander Neckam, by 1187, was the first in Europe to describe the compass and its use for navigation. In 1269, Peter Peregrinus de Maricourt wrote the Epistola de magnete, the first extant treatise describing th
e properties of magnets. In 1282, the properties of magnets and the dry compasses were discussed by Al-Ashraf Umar II, a Yemeni physicist, astronomer, and geographer.11
Leonardo Garzoni's only extant work, the Due trattati sopra la natura, e le qualità della calamita , is the first known example of a modern treatment of magnetic phenomena. Written in years near 1580 and never published, the treatise had a wide diffusion. In particular, Garzoni is referred to as an expert in magnetism by Niccolò 
Cabeo, whose Philosophia Magnetica (1629) is just a re-adjustment of Garzoni's work. Garzoni's treatise was known also to Giovanni Battista Della Porta.
In 1600, William Gilbert published his De Magnete, Magneticisque Corporibus, et de Magno Magnete Tellure . In this work he describes many of his experiments with his model earth called the terrella. From his experiments, he concluded that the Earth was itself magnetic and that this was the reason compasses pointed north whereas, previously, some
 believed that it was the pole star Polaris or a large magnetic island on the north pole that attracted the compass.
An understanding of the relationship between electricity and magnetism began in 1819 with work by Hans Christian Ørsted, a professor at the University of Copenhagen, who discovered, by the accidental twitching of a compass needle near a wire, that an electric current could create a magnetic field. This landmark experiment is known as Ørsted's Experiment. Jean-Baptiste Biot and Fél
ix Savart, both of whom in 1820 came up with the Biot–Savart law giving an equation for the magnetic field from a current-carrying wire. Around the same time, André-Marie Ampère carried out numerous systematic experiments and discovered that the magnetic force between two DC current loops of any shape is equal to the sum of the individual forces that each current element of one circuit exerts on each other current element of the other circuit.
In 1831, Michael Faraday discovered that a time-vary
ing magnetic flux induces a voltage through a wire loop. In 1835, Carl Friedrich Gauss hypothesized, based on Ampère's force law in its original form, that all forms of magnetism arise as a result of elementary point charges moving relative to each other.12 Wilhelm Eduard Weber advanced Gauss's theory to Weber electrodynamics.
From around 1861, James Clerk Maxwell synthesized and expanded many of these insights into Maxwell's equations, unifying electricity, magnetism, and optics into the field 
of electromagnetism. However, Gauss's interpretation of magnetism is not fully compatible with Maxwell's electrodynamics. In 1905, Albert Einstein used Maxwell's equations in motivating his theory of special relativity,13 requiring that the laws hold true in all inertial reference frames. Gauss's approach of interpreting the magnetic force as a mere effect of relative velocities thus found its way back into electrodynamics to some extent.
Electromagnetism has continued to develop into the 21st c
entury, being incorporated into the more fundamental theories of gauge theory, quantum electrodynamics, electroweak theory, and finally the Standard Model.
Magnetism, at its root, arises from three sources:
The magnetic properties of materials are mainly due to the magnetic moments of their atoms' orbiting electrons. The magnetic moments of the nuclei of atoms are typically thousands of times smaller than the electrons' magnetic moments, so they are negligible in the context of the magnetization
 of materials. Nuclear magnetic moments are nevertheless very important in other contexts, particularly in nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).
Ordinarily, the enormous number of electrons in a material are arranged such that their magnetic moments (both orbital and intrinsic) cancel out. This is due, to some extent, to electrons combining into pairs with opposite intrinsic magnetic moments as a result of the Pauli exclusion principle (see electron configuration
), and combining into filled subshells with zero net orbital motion. In both cases, the electrons preferentially adopt arrangements in which the magnetic moment of each electron is canceled by the opposite moment of another electron. Moreover, even when the electron configuration is such that there are unpaired electrons and/or non-filled subshells, it is often the case that the various electrons in the solid will contribute magnetic moments that point in different, random directions so that the
 material will not be magnetic.
Sometimes—either spontaneously, or owing to an applied external magnetic field—each of the electron magnetic moments will be, on average, lined up. A suitable material can then produce a strong net magnetic field.
The magnetic behavior of a material depends on its structure, particularly its electron configuration, for the reasons mentioned above, and also on the temperature. At high temperatures, random thermal motion makes it more difficult for the electrons to 
maintain alignment.
Diamagnetism appears in all materials and is the tendency of a material to oppose an applied magnetic field, and therefore, to be repelled by a magnetic field. However, in a material with paramagnetic properties , the paramagnetic behavior dominates.15 Thus, despite its universal occurrence, diamagnetic behavior is observed only in a purely diamagnetic material. In a diamagnetic material, there are no unpaired electrons, so the intrinsic electron magnetic moments cannot produ
ce any bulk effect. In these cases, the magnetization arises from the electrons' orbital motions, which can be understood classically as follows:
When a material is put in a magnetic field, the electrons circling the nucleus will experience, in addition to their Coulomb attraction to the nucleus, a Lorentz force from the magnetic field. Depending on which direction the electron is orbiting, this force may increase the centripetal force on the electrons, pulling them in towards the nucleus, or it
 may decrease the force, pulling them away from the nucleus. This effect systematically increases the orbital magnetic moments that were aligned opposite the field and decreases the ones aligned parallel to the field (in accordance with Lenz's law). This results in a small bulk magnetic moment, with an opposite direction to the applied field. This description is meant only as a heuristic; the Bohr–Van Leeuwen theorem shows that diamagnetism is impossible according to classical physics, and that 
a proper understanding requires a quantum-mechanical description.
All materials undergo this orbital response. However, in paramagnetic and ferromagnetic substances, the diamagnetic effect is overwhelmed by the much stronger effects caused by the unpaired electrons.
In a paramagnetic material there are unpaired electrons; i.e., atomic or molecular orbitals with exactly one electron in them. While paired electrons are required by the Pauli exclusion principle to have their intrinsic ('spin') magn
etic moments pointing in opposite directions, causing their magnetic fields to cancel out, an unpaired electron is free to align its magnetic moment in any direction. When an external magnetic field is applied, these magnetic moments will tend to align themselves in the same direction as the applied field, thus reinforcing it.
A ferromagnet, like a paramagnetic substance, has unpaired electrons. However, in addition to the electrons' intrinsic magnetic moment's tendency to be parallel to an appl
ied field, there is also in these materials a tendency for these magnetic moments to orient parallel to each other to maintain a lowered-energy state. Thus, even in the absence of an applied field, the magnetic moments of the electrons in the material spontaneously line up parallel to one another.
Every ferromagnetic substance has its own individual temperature, called the Curie temperature, or Curie point, above which it loses its ferromagnetic properties. This is because the thermal tendency t
o disorder overwhelms the energy-lowering due to ferromagnetic order.
Ferromagnetism only occurs in a few substances; common ones are iron, nickel, cobalt, their alloys, and some alloys of rare-earth metals.
The magnetic moments of atoms in a ferromagnetic material cause them to behave something like tiny permanent magnets. They stick together and align themselves into small regions of more or less uniform alignment called magnetic domains or Weiss domains. Magnetic domains can be observed with 
a magnetic force microscope to reveal magnetic domain boundaries that resemble white lines in the sketch. There are many scientific experiments that can physically show magnetic fields.
When a domain contains too many molecules, it becomes unstable and divides into two domains aligned in opposite directions so that they stick together more stably.
When exposed to a magnetic field, the domain boundaries move, so that the domains aligned with the magnetic field grow and dominate the structure (dot
ted yellow area), as shown at the left. When the magnetizing field is removed, the domains may not return to an unmagnetized state. This results in the ferromagnetic material's being magnetized, forming a permanent magnet.
When magnetized strongly enough that the prevailing domain overruns all others to result in only one single domain, the material is magnetically saturated. When a magnetized ferromagnetic material is heated to the Curie point temperature, the molecules are agitated to the poin
t that the magnetic domains lose the organization, and the magnetic properties they cause cease. When the material is cooled, this domain alignment structure spontaneously returns, in a manner roughly analogous to how a liquid can freeze into a crystalline solid.
In an antiferromagnet, unlike a ferromagnet, there is a tendency for the intrinsic magnetic moments of neighboring valence electrons to point in opposite directions. When all atoms are arranged in a substance so that each neighbor is an
ti-parallel, the substance is antiferromagnetic. Antiferromagnets have a zero net magnetic moment because adjacent opposite moment cancels out, meaning that no field is produced by them. Antiferromagnets are less common compared to the other types of behaviors and are mostly observed at low temperatures. In varying temperatures, antiferromagnets can be seen to exhibit diamagnetic and ferromagnetic properties.
In some materials, neighboring electrons prefer to point in opposite directions, but th
ere is no geometrical arrangement in which each pair of neighbors is anti-aligned. This is called a canted antiferromagnet or spin ice and is an example of geometrical frustration.
Like ferromagnetism, ferrimagnets retain their magnetization in the absence of a field. However, like antiferromagnets, neighboring pairs of electron spins tend to point in opposite directions. These two properties are not contradictory, because in the optimal geometrical arrangement, there is more magnetic moment fro
m the sublattice of electrons that point in one direction, than from the sublattice that points in the opposite direction.
Most ferrites are ferrimagnetic. The first discovered magnetic substance, magnetite, is a ferrite and was originally believed to be a ferromagnet; Louis Néel disproved this, however, after discovering ferrimagnetism.
When a ferromagnet or ferrimagnet is sufficiently small, it acts like a single magnetic spin that is subject to Brownian motion. Its response to a magnetic fiel
d is qualitatively similar to the response of a paramagnet, but much larger.
Japanese physicist Yosuke Nagaokaja conceived of a type of magnetism in a square, two-dimensional lattice where every lattice node had one electron. If one electron was removed under specific conditions, the lattice's energy would be minimal only when all electrons' spins were parallel.
A variation on this was achieved experimentally by arranging the atoms in a triangular moiré lattice of molybdenum diselenide and tungs
ten disulfide monolayers. Applying a weak magnetic field and a voltage led to ferromagnetic behavior when 100–150% more electrons than lattice nodes were present. The extra electrons delocalized and paired with lattice electrons to form doublons. Delocalization was prevented unless the lattice electrons had aligned spins. The doublons thus created localized ferromagnetic regions. The phenomenon took place at 140 millikelvins.16
An electromagnet is a type of magnet in which the magnetic field is 
produced by an electric current.17 The magnetic field disappears when the current is turned off. Electromagnets usually consist of a large number of closely spaced turns of wire that create the magnetic field. The wire turns are often wound around a magnetic core made from a ferromagnetic or ferrimagnetic material such as iron; the magnetic core concentrates the magnetic flux and makes a more powerful magnet.
The main advantage of an electromagnet over a permanent magnet is that the magnetic fie
ld can be quickly changed by controlling the amount of electric current in the winding. However, unlike a permanent magnet that needs no power, an electromagnet requires a continuous supply of current to maintain the magnetic field.
Electromagnets are widely used as components of other electrical devices, such as motors, generators, relays, solenoids, loudspeakers, hard disks, MRI machines, scientific instruments, and magnetic separation equipment. Electromagnets are also employed in industry fo
r picking up and moving heavy iron objects such as scrap iron and steel.18 Electromagnetism was discovered in 1820.19
As a consequence of Einstein's theory of special relativity, electricity and magnetism are fundamentally interlinked. Both magnetism lacking electricity, and electricity without magnetism, are inconsistent with special relativity, due to such effects as length contraction, time dilation, and the fact that the magnetic force is velocity-dependent. However, when both electricity an
d magnetism are taken into account, the resulting theory (electromagnetism) is fully consistent with special relativity.1320 In particular, a phenomenon that appears purely electric or purely magnetic to one observer may be a mix of both to another, or more generally the relative contributions of electricity and magnetism are dependent on the frame of reference. Thus, special relativity "mixes" electricity and magnetism into a single, inseparable phenomenon called electromagnetism, analogous to 
how general relativity "mixes" space and time into spacetime.
All observations on electromagnetism apply to what might be considered to be primarily magnetism, e.g. perturbations in the magnetic field are necessarily accompanied by a nonzero electric field, and propagate at the speed of light.21
The quantity μ0M is called magnetic polarization.
If the field H is small, the response of the magnetization M in a diamagnet or paramagnet is approximately linear:
the constant of proportionality being 
called the magnetic susceptibility. If so,
In a hard magnet such as a ferromagnet, M is not proportional to the field and is generally nonzero even when H is zero (see Remanence).
The phenomenon of magnetism is "mediated" by the magnetic field. An electric current or magnetic dipole creates a magnetic field, and that field, in turn, imparts magnetic forces on other particles that are in the fields.
Maxwell's equations, which simplify to the Biot–Savart law in the case of steady currents, describ
e the origin and behavior of the fields that govern these forces. Therefore, magnetism is seen whenever electrically charged particles are in motion—for example, from movement of electrons in an electric current, or in certain cases from the orbital motion of electrons around an atom's nucleus. They also arise from "intrinsic" magnetic dipoles arising from quantum-mechanical spin.
The same situations that create magnetic fields—charge moving in a current or in an atom, and intrinsic magnetic dip
oles—are also the situations in which a magnetic field has an effect, creating a force. Following is the formula for moving charge; for the forces on an intrinsic dipole, see magnetic dipole.
When a charged particle moves through a magnetic field B, it feels a Lorentz force F given by the cross product:22
is the electric charge of the particle, and
Because this is a cross product, the force is perpendicular to both the motion of the particle and the magnetic field. The magnitude of the force is

The direction of the force vector can be determined using the right-hand rule to figure out the direction of
All known magnets are dipoles, meaning that they have a "north" and "south" pole, so named as the Earth's magnetic field applies a force to point a magnet's poles toward areas near the Earth's respective North Pole and South Pole, specifically the north magnetic pole and south magnetic pole. A magnet's north pole is attracted to another magnet's south pole.
A magnetic field contains energ
y, and physical systems move toward configurations with lower energy. When diamagnetic material is placed in a magnetic field, a magnetic dipole tends to align itself in opposed polarity to that field, thereby lowering the net field strength. When ferromagnetic material is placed within a magnetic field, the magnetic dipoles align to the applied field, thus expanding the domain walls of the magnetic domains.
Since a bar magnet gets its ferromagnetism from electrons distributed evenly throughout 
the bar, when a bar magnet is cut in half, each of the resulting pieces is a smaller bar magnet. Even though a magnet is said to have a north pole and a south pole, these two poles cannot be separated from each other. A monopole—if such a thing exists—would be a new and fundamentally different kind of magnetic object. It would act as an isolated north pole, not attached to a south pole, or vice versa. Monopoles would carry "magnetic charge" analogous to electric charge. Despite systematic search
es since 1931, they have never been observed.23
Nevertheless, some theoretical physics models predict the existence of these magnetic monopoles. Paul Dirac observed in 1931 that, because electricity and magnetism show a certain symmetry, just as quantum theory predicts that individual positive or negative electric charges can be observed without the opposing charge, isolated South or North magnetic poles should be observable. Using quantum theory Dirac showed that if magnetic monopoles exist, th
en one could explain the quantization of electric charge—that is, why the observed elementary particles carry charges that are multiples of the charge of the electron.
Certain grand unified theories predict the existence of monopoles which, unlike elementary particles, are solitons (localized energy packets). The initial results of using these models to estimate the number of monopoles created in the Big Bang contradicted cosmological observations—the monopoles would have been so plentiful and m
assive that they would have long since halted the expansion of the universe. However, the idea of inflation  was successful in solving this problem, creating models in which monopoles existed but were rare enough to be consistent with current observations.24
Some organisms can detect magnetic fields, a phenomenon known as magnetoception. Some materials in living things are ferromagnetic, though it is unclear if the magnetic properties serve a special function or are merely a byproduct of contain
ing iron. For instance, chitons, a type of marine mollusk, produce magnetite to harden their teeth, and even humans produce magnetite in bodily tissue.26
Magnetobiology studies the effects of magnetic fields on living organisms; fields naturally produced by an organism are known as biomagnetism. Many biological organisms are mostly made of water, and because water is diamagnetic, extremely strong magnetic fields can repel these living things.
In the years after 1820, André-Marie Ampère carried o
ut numerous experiments in which he measured the forces between direct currents. In particular, he also studied the magnetic forces between non-parallel wires.27 The final result of his work was a force law that is now named after him. In 1835, Carl Friedrich Gauss realized 12 that Ampere's force law in its original form can be explained by a generalization of Coulomb's law.
Gauss's force law states that the electromagnetic force
, in the vicinity of another point charge,
is the relative velocit
y. Wilhelm Eduard Weber confirmed Gauss's hypothesis in numerous experiments.282930 By means of Weber electrodynamics it is possible to explain the static and quasi-static effects in the non-relativistic regime of classical electrodynamics without magnetic field and Lorentz force.
Since 1870, Maxwell electrodynamics has been developed, which postulates that electric and magnetic fields exist. In Maxwell's electrodynamics, the actual electromagnetic force can be calculated using the Lorentz force
, which, like the Weber force, is speed-dependent. However, Maxwell's electrodynamics is not fully compatible with the work of Ampère, Gauss and Weber in the quasi-static regime. In particular, Ampère's original force law and the Biot-Savart law are only equivalent if the field-generating conductor loop is closed.31 Maxwell's electrodynamics therefore represents a break with the interpretation of magnetism by Gauss and Weber, since in Maxwell's electrodynamics it is no longer possible to deduce 
the magnetic force from a central force.
While heuristic explanations based on classical physics can be formulated, diamagnetism, paramagnetism and ferromagnetism can be fully explained only using quantum theory.3233
A successful model was developed already in 1927, by Walter Heitler and Fritz London, who derived, quantum-mechanically, how hydrogen molecules are formed from hydrogen atoms, i.e. from the atomic hydrogen orbitals
centered at the nuclei A and B, see below. That this leads to magnet
ism is not at all obvious, but will be explained in the following.
According to the Heitler–London theory, so-called two-body molecular
-orbitals are formed, namely the resulting orbital is:
Here the last product means that a first electron, r1, is in an atomic hydrogen-orbital centered at the second nucleus, whereas the second electron runs around the first nucleus. This "exchange" phenomenon is an expression for the quantum-mechanical property that particles with identical properties cannot be
 distinguished. It is specific not only for the formation of chemical bonds, but also for magnetism. That is, in this connection the term exchange interaction arises, a term which is essential for the origin of magnetism, and which is stronger, roughly by factors 100 and even by 1000, than the energies arising from the electrodynamic dipole-dipole interaction.
, which is responsible for the magnetism, we have the already mentioned Pauli's principle, namely that a symmetric orbital (i.e. with the
 + sign as above) must be multiplied with an antisymmetric spin function (i.e. with a − sign), and vice versa. Thus:
must be substituted by α and β, respectively , but also the sign + by the − sign, and finally ri by the discrete values si ;clip-path:polygon(0px 0px,0px 0px,0px 0px);height:1px;margin:-1px;overflow:hidden;padding:0;position:absolute;width:1px}12); thereby we have
. The "singlet state", i.e. the − sign, means: the spins are antiparallel, i.e. for the solid we have antiferromagneti
sm, and for two-atomic molecules one has diamagnetism. The tendency to form a (homoeopolar) chemical bond  results through the Pauli principle automatically in an antisymmetric spin state (i.e. with the − sign). In contrast, the Coulomb repulsion of the electrons, i.e. the tendency that they try to avoid each other by this repulsion, would lead to an antisymmetric orbital function (i.e. with the − sign) of these two particles, and complementary to a symmetric spin function . Thus, now the spins 
would be parallel .
The last-mentioned tendency dominates in the metals iron, cobalt and nickel, and in some rare earths, which are ferromagnetic. Most of the other metals, where the first-mentioned tendency dominates, are nonmagnetic (e.g. sodium, aluminium, and magnesium) or antiferromagnetic (e.g. manganese). Diatomic gases are also almost exclusively diamagnetic, and not paramagnetic. However, the oxygen molecule, because of the involvement of π-orbitals, is an exception important for the li
fe-sciences.
The Heitler–London considerations can be generalized to the Heisenberg model of magnetism (Heisenberg 1928).
The explanation of the phenomena is thus essentially based on all subtleties of quantum mechanics, whereas the electrodynamics covers mainly the phenomenology.

The Solar System is the gravitationally bound system of the Sun and the masses that orbit it, most prominently its eight planets, of which Earth is one. The Solar System is an isolated single-star planetary system (not part of a larger star system) within the Milky Way Galaxy. The system formed about 4.6billion years ago when a dense region of a molecular cloud collapsed, creating the Sun and a protoplanetary disc from which the orbiting bodies assembled.
The Sun accounts for 99.86% of the Solar
 System's total mass. Inside the Sun's core, hydrogen is fused into helium, releasing energy that is emitted through the Sun's photosphere. This creates the heliosphere and a decreasing temperature gradient across the Solar System.
The next most massive objects of the system are the eight planets, which by definition dominate the orbits they occupy. Closest to the Sun in order of increasing distance are the terrestrial planets – Mercury, Venus, Earth and Mars. These four planets are part of the 
inner Solar System. Earth and Mars are the only planets that orbit within the Sun's habitable zone, in which sunlight can keep surface water liquid under atmospheric pressure. Beyond the frost line at about five astronomical units (AU),d are the planets of the outer Solar System: two gas giants (Jupiter and Saturn) and two ice giants (Uranus and Neptune). Jupiter and Saturn possess nearly 90% of the non-stellar mass of the Solar System.
Objects of planetary mass that do not dominate their orbit 
but directly orbit the Sun are called dwarf planets. The International Astronomical Union's Minor Planet Center lists Ceres, Pluto, Eris, Makemake, and Haumea as dwarf planets.12 Four other Solar System objects are generally identified as such: Orcus, Quaoar, Gonggong, and Sedna.13 Less massive than the dwarf planets are the vast number of small Solar System bodies, such as asteroids, comets, centaurs, meteoroids, and interplanetary dust clouds.e The dwarf planet Ceres and many of these smaller 
bodies are located in the asteroid belt (between Mars's and Jupiter's orbit), while all other dwarf planets are members of populations of trans-Neptunian objects, which may be found in the Kuiper belt just outside Neptune or in the further scattered disc.
Many objects in the Solar System do not orbit the Sun directly and are instead natural satellites, commonly called 'moons', of larger bodies. These can be found throughout the Solar System in sizes from planetary-mass moons at their largest to 
much less massive moonlets at their smallest. The largest two moons (Ganymede of Jupiter and Titan of Saturn) are larger (though less massive) than the smallest planet (Mercury), while the seven most massive, which includes Earth's Moon, are more massive and larger than any of the dwarf planets.
Within the heliosphere, the Solar System is constantly flooded by the charged plasma particles of the solar wind, which, along with interplanetary dust, gas and cosmic rays, form an interplanetary medium
 between the bodies of the Solar System. At around 70–90AU from the Sun, the solar wind is halted by the interstellar medium, resulting in the heliopause and the border of the interplanetary medium to interstellar space. Further out somewhere beyond 2,000AU from the Sun extends the outermost region of the Solar System, the theorized Oort cloud, the source for long-period comets, stretching to the edge of the Solar System, the edge of its Hill sphere, at 178,000–227,000AU (2.81–3.59ly), where its
 gravitational potential becomes equal to the galactic potential.14 The Solar System currently moves through a cloud of interstellar medium called the Local Cloud. The closest star to the Solar System, Proxima Centauri, is 269,000AU (4.25ly) away. Both are within the Local Bubble, a relatively small 1,000 light-years (ly) wide region of the Milky Way.
The Solar System includes the Sun and all objects that are bound to it by gravity and orbit it.151617
The International Astronomical Union describ
es the Solar System as all objects that are bound by the gravity of the Sun, the Sun itself, its eight planets, and the other celestial bodies which orbit it.18 NASA describes the Solar System as a planetary system, including the Sun and all objects that orbit it.19
Capitalization of the name varies. When not used as a proper noun and written without capitalization, "solar system" may refer to either the Solar System itself or any planetary system reminiscent of the Solar System.15 The Internati
onal Astronomical Union, the authoritative body regarding astronomical nomenclature, specifies capitalizing the names of all individual astronomical objects but uses mixed "Solar System" and "solar system" structures in their naming guidelines document.20
The Solar System formed at least 4.568billion years ago from the gravitational collapse of a region within a large molecular cloud.b This initial cloud was likely several light-years across and probably birthed several stars.22 As is typical of
 molecular clouds, this one consisted mostly of hydrogen, with some helium, and small amounts of heavier elements fused by previous generations of stars.23
As the pre-solar nebula23 collapsed, conservation of angular momentum caused it to rotate faster. The center, where most of the mass collected, became increasingly hotter than the surroundings.22 As the contracting nebula spun faster, it began to flatten into a protoplanetary disc with a diameter of roughly 200AU2224 and a hot, dense protosta
r at the center.2526 The planets formed by accretion from this disc,27 in which dust and gas gravitationally attracted each other, coalescing to form ever larger bodies. Hundreds of protoplanets may have existed in the early Solar System, but they either merged or were destroyed or ejected, leaving the planets, dwarf planets, and leftover minor bodies.2829
In the inner Solar System, heat from the accretion process exceeded the boiling point of hydrocarbon molecules for the first million years, l
eading to low carbon content for the inner planets. The boundary for this process has been dubbed the soot line.30 As the Solar System disk cooled, this line moved inward and now lies within Earth's orbit around the Sun.31 Material other than metals and silicates, due to their higher boiling points, could not persist in solid form. Here planets formed that are mainly rocky, which are Mercury, Venus, Earth, and Mars. Because these refractory materials only comprised a small fraction of the solar 
nebula, the terrestrial planets could not grow very large.28
The giant planets (Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune) formed further out, beyond the frost line, the point between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter where material is cool enough for volatile icy compounds to remain solid. The ices that formed these planets were more plentiful than the metals and silicates that formed the terrestrial inner planets, allowing them to grow massive enough to capture large atmospheres of hydrogen and helium
, the lightest and most abundant elements.28 Leftover debris that never became planets congregated in regions such as the asteroid belt, Kuiper belt, and Oort cloud.28
Within 50million years, the pressure and density of hydrogen in the center of the protostar became great enough for it to begin thermonuclear fusion.32 As helium accumulates at its core, the Sun is growing brighter;33 early in its main-sequence life its brightness was 70% that of what it is today.34 The temperature, reaction rate,
 pressure, and density increased until hydrostatic equilibrium was achieved: the thermal pressure counterbalancing the force of gravity. At this point, the Sun became a main-sequence star.35 Solar wind from the Sun created the heliosphere and swept away the remaining gas and dust from the protoplanetary disc into interstellar space.33
Following the dissipation of the protoplanetary disk, the Nice model proposes that gravitational encounters between planetesimals and the gas giants caused each to
 migrate into different orbits. This led to dynamical instability of the entire system, which scattered the planetesimals and ultimately placed the gas giants in their current positions. During this period, the grand tack hypothesis suggests that a final inward migration of Jupiter dispersed much of the asteroid belt, leading to the Late Heavy Bombardment of the inner planets.3637
The Solar System remains in a relatively stable, slowly evolving state by following isolated, gravitationally bound 
orbits around the Sun.38 Although the Solar System has been fairly stable for billions of years, it is technically chaotic, and may eventually be disrupted. There is a small chance that another star will pass through the Solar System in the next few billion years. Although this could destabilize the system and eventually lead millions of years later to expulsion of planets, collisions of planets, or planets hitting the Sun, it would most likely leave the Solar System much as it is today.39
The S
un's main-sequence phase, from beginning to end, will last about 10billion years for the Sun compared to around two billion years for all other subsequent phases of the Sun's pre-remnant life combined.40 The Solar System will remain roughly as it is known today until the hydrogen in the core of the Sun has been entirely converted to helium, which will occur roughly 5billion years from now. This will mark the end of the Sun's main-sequence life. At that time, the core of the Sun will contract wit
h hydrogen fusion occurring along a shell surrounding the inert helium, and the energy output will be greater than at present. The outer layers of the Sun will expand to roughly 260 times its current diameter, and the Sun will become a red giant. Because of its increased surface area, the surface of the Sun will be cooler (2,600K (4,220°F) at its coolest) than it is on the main sequence.40
The expanding Sun is expected to vaporize Mercury as well as Venus, and render Earth and Mars uninhabitable
 (possibly destroying Earth as well).4142 Eventually, the core will be hot enough for helium fusion; the Sun will burn helium for a fraction of the time it burned hydrogen in the core. The Sun is not massive enough to commence the fusion of heavier elements, and nuclear reactions in the core will dwindle. Its outer layers will be ejected into space, leaving behind a dense white dwarf, half the original mass of the Sun but only the size of Earth.40 The ejected outer layers may form a planetary ne
bula, returning some of the material that formed the Sunbut now enriched with heavier elements like carbonto the interstellar medium.4344
Astronomers sometimes divide the Solar System structure into separate regions. The inner Solar System includes Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars, and the bodies in the asteroid belt. The outer Solar System includes Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, Neptune, and the bodies in the Kuiper belt.45 Since the discovery of the Kuiper belt, the outermost parts of the Solar System ar
e considered a distinct region consisting of the objects beyond Neptune.46
The principal component of the Solar System is the Sun, a G-type main-sequence star that contains 99.86% of the system's known mass and dominates it gravitationally.47 The Sun's four largest orbiting bodies, the giant planets, account for 99% of the remaining mass, with Jupiter and Saturn together comprising more than 90%. The remaining objects of the Solar System  together comprise less than 0.002% of the Solar System's 
total mass.f
The Sun is composed of roughly 98% hydrogen and helium,51 as are Jupiter and Saturn.5253 A composition gradient exists in the Solar System, created by heat and light pressure from the early Sun; those objects closer to the Sun, which are more affected by heat and light pressure, are composed of elements with high melting points. Objects farther from the Sun are composed largely of materials with lower melting points.54 The boundary in the Solar System beyond which those volatile sub
stances could coalesce is known as the frost line, and it lies at roughly five times the Earth's distance from the Sun.5
The planets and other large objects in orbit around the Sun lie near the invariable plane of the Solar System, as does Earth's orbit, known as the ecliptic, and most closely the orbit of Jupiter, with an inclination to it of 0.3219°.55 Smaller icy objects such as comets frequently orbit at significantly greater angles to this plane.5657 Most of the planets in the Solar System 
have secondary systems of their own, being orbited by natural satellites called moons. All of the largest natural satellites are in synchronous rotation, with one face permanently turned toward their parent. The four giant planets have planetary rings, thin discs of tiny particles that orbit them in unison.58
As a result of the formation of the Solar System, planets and most other objects orbit the Sun in the same direction that the Sun is rotating. That is, counter-clockwise, as viewed from abo
ve Earth's north pole.59 There are exceptions, such as Halley's Comet.60 Most of the larger moons orbit their planets in prograde direction, matching the direction of planetary rotation; Neptune's moon Triton is the largest to orbit in the opposite, retrograde manner.61 Most larger objects rotate around their own axes in the prograde direction relative to their orbit, though the rotation of Venus is retrograde.62
To a good first approximation, Kepler's laws of planetary motion describe the orbit
s of objects around the Sun.63433–437 These laws stipulate that each object travels along an ellipse with the Sun at one focus, which causes the body's distance from the Sun to vary over the course of its year. A body's closest approach to the Sun is called its perihelion, whereas its most distant point from the Sun is called its aphelion.649-6 With the exception of Mercury, the orbits of the planets are nearly circular, but many comets, asteroids, and Kuiper belt objects follow highly elliptica
l orbits. Kepler's laws only account for the influence of the Sun's gravity upon an orbiting body, not the gravitational pulls of different bodies upon each other. On a human time scale, these perturbations can be accounted for using numerical models,649-6 but the planetary system can change chaotically over billions of years.65
The angular momentum of the Solar System is a measure of the total amount of orbital and rotational momentum possessed by all its moving components.66 Although the Sun d
ominates the system by mass, it accounts for only about 2% of the angular momentum.6768 The planets, dominated by Jupiter, account for most of the rest of the angular momentum due to the combination of their mass, orbit, and distance from the Sun, with a possibly significant contribution from comets.67
The radius of the Sun is 0.0047AU (700,000km; 400,000mi).70 Thus, the Sun occupies 0.00001% (1 part in 107) of the volume of a sphere with a radius the size of Earth's orbit, whereas Earth's volum
e is roughly 1millionth (10−6) that of the Sun. Jupiter, the largest planet, is 5.2AU from the Sun and has a radius of 71,000km (0.00047AU; 44,000mi), whereas the most distant planet, Neptune, is 30AU from the Sun.5371
With a few exceptions, the farther a planet or belt is from the Sun, the larger the distance between its orbit and the orbit of the next nearest object to the Sun. For example, Venus is approximately 0.33AU farther out from the Sun than Mercury, whereas Saturn is 4.3AU out from Ju
piter, and Neptune lies 10.5AU out from Uranus. Attempts have been made to determine a relationship between these orbital distances, like the Titius–Bode law72 and Johannes Kepler's model based on the Platonic solids,73 but ongoing discoveries have invalidated these hypotheses.74
Some Solar System models attempt to convey the relative scales involved in the Solar System in human terms. Some are small in scale (and may be mechanicalcalled orreries)whereas others extend across cities or regional a
reas.75 The largest such scale model, the Sweden Solar System, uses the 110-meter (361-foot) Avicii Arena in Stockholm as its substitute Sun, and, following the scale, Jupiter is a 7.5-meter (25-foot) sphere at Stockholm Arlanda Airport, 40km (25mi) away, whereas the farthest current object, Sedna, is a 10cm (4in) sphere in Luleå, 912km (567mi) away.7677 At that scale, the distance to Proxima Centauri would be roughly 8 times further than the Moon is from Earth.
If the Sun–Neptune distance is sc
aled to 100 metres (330ft), then the Sun would be about 3cm (1.2in) in diameter , the giant planets would be all smaller than about 3mm (0.12in), and Earth's diameter along with that of the other terrestrial planets would be smaller than a flea (0.3mm or 0.012in) at this scale.78
The zone of habitability of the Solar System is conventionally located in the inner Solar System around Earth, where atmospheric liquid water is enabled by the Sun.79
Besides solar energy, the primary characteristic of 
the Solar System enabling the presence of life is the heliosphere and planetary magnetic fields (for those planets that have them). These magnetic fields partially shield the Solar System from high-energy interstellar particles called cosmic rays. The density of cosmic rays in the interstellar medium and the strength of the Sun's magnetic field change on very long timescales, so the level of cosmic-ray penetration in the Solar System varies, though by how much is unknown.80
Habitability in the S
olar System is though not solely dependent on surface conditions, and furthermore the Solar environment, since there might be habitablity in potential subsurface oceans of various Solar System bodies,81 or cloud layers of some planets, particularly Venus.82
Analysis of Kepler data suggests that observed planetary systems in the Milky Way fall into three groups: "similar", which comprise planets of similar sizes similar distances apart and with highly circular orbits; "ordered", in which the mass
es of planets tend to increase with distance from their star, and "mixed", which show no pattern in masses whatsoever. The Solar System is an ordered system, as are 37% of observed systems. Similar systems however are the majority, comprising 59% of observed systems, while mixed systems comprise just 4%.83
Compared to many extrasolar systems, the Solar System stands out in lacking planets interior to the orbit of Mercury.8485 The known Solar System lacks super-Earths, planets between one and ten
 times as massive as the Earth,84 although the hypothetical Planet Nine, if it does exist, could be a super-Earth orbiting in the edge of the Solar System.86
Uncommonly, it has only small terrestrial and large gas giants; elsewhere planets of intermediate size are typicalboth rocky and gasso there is no "gap" as seen between the size of Earth and of Neptune (with a radius 3.8 times as large). As many of these super-Earths are closer to their respective stars than Mercury is to the Sun, a hypothe
sis has arisen that all planetary systems start with many close-in planets, and that typically a sequence of their collisions causes consolidation of mass into few larger planets, but in case of the Solar System the collisions caused their destruction and ejection.8487
The orbits of Solar System planets are nearly circular. Compared to many other systems, they have smaller orbital eccentricity.84 Although there are attempts to explain it partly with a bias in the radial-velocity detection method
 and partly with long interactions of a quite high number of planets, the exact causes remain undetermined.8488
The Sun is the Solar System's star and by far its most massive component. Its large mass (332,900 Earth masses),89 which comprises 99.86% of all the mass in the Solar System,90 produces temperatures and densities in its core high enough to sustain nuclear fusion of hydrogen into helium.91 This releases an enormous amount of energy, mostly radiated into space as electromagnetic radiatio
n peaking in visible light.9293
Because the Sun fuses hydrogen at its core, it is a main-sequence star. More specifically, it is a G2-type main-sequence star, where the type designation refers to its effective temperature. Hotter main-sequence stars are more luminous but shorter lived. The Sun's temperature is intermediate between that of the hottest stars and that of the coolest stars. Stars brighter and hotter than the Sun are rare, whereas substantially dimmer and cooler stars, known as red d
warfs, make up about 75% of the fusor stars in the Milky Way.94
The Sun is a population I star, having formed in the galaxy's spiral arms. It has a higher abundance of elements heavier than hydrogen and helium ("metals" in astronomical parlance) than the older population II stars in the galactic bulge and halo.95 Elements heavier than hydrogen and helium were formed in the cores of ancient and exploding stars, so the first generation of stars had to die before the universe could be enriched with
 these atoms. The oldest stars contain few metals, whereas stars born later have more. This higher metallicity is thought to have been crucial to the Sun's development of a planetary system because the planets formed from the accretion of "metals".96
The region of space dominated by the Solar magnetosphere is the heliosphere, which spans much of the Solar System. Along with light, the Sun radiates a continuous stream of charged particles (a plasma) called the solar wind. This stream spreads outw
ards at speeds from 900,000 kilometres per hour (560,000mph) to 2,880,000 kilometres per hour (1,790,000mph),97 filling the vacuum between the bodies of the Solar System. The result is a thin, dusty atmosphere, called the interplanetary medium, which extends to at least 100AU.98
Activity on the Sun's surface, such as solar flares and coronal mass ejections, disturbs the heliosphere, creating space weather and causing geomagnetic storms.99 Coronal mass ejections and similar events blow a magnetic
 field and huge quantities of material from the surface of the Sun. The interaction of this magnetic field and material with Earth's magnetic field funnels charged particles into Earth's upper atmosphere, where its interactions create aurorae seen near the magnetic poles.100 The largest stable structure within the heliosphere is the heliospheric current sheet, a spiral form created by the actions of the Sun's rotating magnetic field on the interplanetary medium.101102
The inner Solar System is t
he region comprising the terrestrial planets and the asteroids.103 Composed mainly of silicates and metals,104 the objects of the inner Solar System are relatively close to the Sun; the radius of this entire region is less than the distance between the orbits of Jupiter and Saturn. This region is within the frost line, which is a little less than 5AU from the Sun.56
The four terrestrial or inner planets have dense, rocky compositions, few or no moons, and no ring systems. They are composed large
ly of refractory minerals such as silicates—which form their crusts and mantles—and metals such as iron and nickel which form their cores. Three of the four inner planets (Venus, Earth, and Mars) have atmospheres substantial enough to generate weather; all have impact craters and tectonic surface features, such as rift valleys and volcanoes.105
Asteroids, except for the largest, Ceres, are classified as small Solar System bodies and are composed mainly of carbonaceous, refractory rocky and metal
lic minerals, with some ice.142143 They range from a few meters to hundreds of kilometers in size. Many asteroids are divided into asteroid groups and families based on their orbital characteristics. Some asteroids have natural satellites that orbit them, that is, asteroids that orbit larger asteroids.144
The asteroid belt occupies a torus-shaped region between 2.3 and 3.3AU from the Sun, which lies between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter. It is thought to be remnants from the Solar System's form
ation that failed to coalesce because of the gravitational interference of Jupiter.156 The asteroid belt contains tens of thousands, possibly millions, of objects over one kilometer in diameter.157 Despite this, the total mass of the asteroid belt is unlikely to be more than a thousandth of that of Earth.50 The asteroid belt is very sparsely populated; spacecraft routinely pass through without incident.158
Below are the descriptions of the three largest bodies in the asteroid belt. They are all 
considered to be relatively intact protoplanets, a precursor stage before becoming a fully-formed planet (see List of exceptional asteroids):159160161
Hilda asteroids are in a 3:2 resonance with Jupiter; that is, they go around the Sun three times for every two Jovian orbits.175 They lie in three linked clusters between Jupiter and the main asteroid belt.
Trojans are bodies located within another body's gravitationally stable Lagrange points: L4, 60° ahead in its orbit, or L5, 60° behind in its 
orbit.176 Every planet except Mercury is known to possess at least one trojan.177178179 The Jupiter trojan population is roughly equal to that of the asteroid belt.180 After Jupiter, Neptune possesses the most confirmed trojans, at 28.181
The outer region of the Solar System is home to the giant planets and their large moons. The centaurs and many short-period comets orbit in this region. Due to their greater distance from the Sun, the solid objects in the outer Solar System contain a higher pro
portion of volatiles such as water, ammonia, and methane, than planets of the inner Solar System because their lower temperatures allow these compounds to remain solid, without significant sublimation.28
The four outer planets, called giant planets or Jovian planets, collectively make up 99% of the mass orbiting the Sun.f All four giant planets have multiple moons and a ring system, although only Saturn's rings are easily observed from Earth.105 Jupiter and Saturn are composed mainly of gases wi
th extremely low melting points, such as hydrogen, helium, and neon,182 hence their designation as gas giants.183 Uranus and Neptune are ice giants,184 meaning they are largely composed of 'ice' in the astronomical sense  Icy substances comprise the majority of the satellites of the giant planets and small objects that lie beyond Neptune's orbit.185186
The centaurs are icy, comet-like bodies whose semi-major axes are longer than Jupiter's and shorter than Neptune's (between 5.5 and 30AU). These 
are former Kuiper belt and scattered disc objects (SDOs) that were gravitationally perturbed closer to the Sun by the outer planets, and are expected to become comets or be ejected out of the Solar System.49 While most centaurs are inactive and asteroid-like, some exhibit cometary activity, such as the first centaur discovered, 2060 Chiron, which has been classified as a comet (95P) because it develops a coma just as comets do when they approach the Sun.207 The largest known centaur, 10199 Chari
klo, has a diameter of about 250km (160mi) and is one of the few minor planets possessing a ring system.208209
Beyond the orbit of Neptune lies the area of the "trans-Neptunian region", with the doughnut-shaped Kuiper belt, home of Pluto and several other dwarf planets, and an overlapping disc of scattered objects, which is tilted toward the plane of the Solar System and reaches much further out than the Kuiper belt. The entire region is still largely unexplored. It appears to consist overwhelmi
ngly of many thousands of small worldsthe largest having a diameter only a fifth that of Earth and a mass far smaller than that of the Mooncomposed mainly of rock and ice. This region is sometimes described as the "third zone of the Solar System", enclosing the inner and the outer Solar System.210
The Kuiper belt is a great ring of debris similar to the asteroid belt, but consisting mainly of objects composed primarily of ice.211 It extends between 30 and 50AU from the Sun. It is composed mainly
 of small Solar System bodies, although the largest few are probably large enough to be dwarf planets.212 There are estimated to be over 100,000 Kuiper belt objects with a diameter greater than 50km (30mi), but the total mass of the Kuiper belt is thought to be only a tenth or even a hundredth the mass of Earth.49 Many Kuiper belt objects have satellites,213 and most have orbits that are substantially inclined (~10°) to the plane of the ecliptic.214
The Kuiper belt can be roughly divided into th
e "classical" belt and the resonant trans-Neptunian objects.211 The latter have orbits whose periods are in a simple ratio to that of Neptune: for example, going around the Sun twice for every three times that Neptune does, or once for every two. The classical belt consists of objects having no resonance with Neptune, and extends from roughly 39.4 to 47.7AU.215 Members of the classical Kuiper belt are sometimes called "cubewanos", after the first of their kind to be discovered, originally design
ated 1992 QB1, (and has since been named Albion); they are still in near primordial, low-eccentricity orbits.216
There is strong consensus among astronomers that five members of the Kuiper belt are dwarf planets.212217 Many dwarf planet candidates are being considered, pending further data for verification.218
The scattered disc, which overlaps the Kuiper belt but extends out to near 500AU, is thought to be the source of short-period comets. Scattered-disc objects are believed to have been pertu
rbed into erratic orbits by the gravitational influence of Neptune's early outward migration. Most scattered disc objects have perihelia within the Kuiper belt but aphelia far beyond it (some more than 150AU from the Sun). SDOs' orbits can be inclined up to 46.8° from the ecliptic plane.232 Some astronomers consider the scattered disc to be merely another region of the Kuiper belt and describe scattered-disc objects as "scattered Kuiper belt objects".233 Some astronomers classify centaurs as inw
ard-scattered Kuiper belt objects along with the outward-scattered residents of the scattered disc.234
Currently, there is strong consensus among astronomers that two of the bodies in the scattered disc are dwarf planets:
Some objects in the Solar System have a very large orbit, and therefore are much less affected by the known giant planets than other minor planet populations. These bodies are called extreme trans-Neptunian objects, or ETNOs for short.238 Generally, ETNOs' semi-major axes are a
t least 150–250AU wide.238239 For example, 541132 Leleākūhonua orbits the Sun once every ~32,000years, with a distance of 65–2000AU from the Sun.D 11
This population is divided into three subgroups by astronomers. The scattered ETNOs have perihelia around 38–45AU and an exceptionally high eccentricity of more than 0.85. As with the regular scattered disc objects, they were likely formed as result of gravitational scattering by Neptune and still interact with the giant planets. The detached ETNOs
, with perihelia approximately between 40–45 and 50–60AU, are less affected by Neptune than the scattered ETNOs, but are still relatively close to Neptune. The sednoids or inner Oort cloud objects, with perihelia beyond 50–60AU, are too far from Neptune to be strongly influenced by it.238
Currently, there is one ETNO that is classified as a dwarf planet:
Statistical variance has been observed in the orbits of some extreme trans-Neptunian objects, whose closest approaches to the Sun are mostly cl
ustered around one sector and who display a similar orbital tilt to each other.241242243 Some astronomers have suggested that this may be the result of the influence of a large planet beyond Neptune; this hypothetical planet has been termed Planet Nine.244 Others credit this statistical variance to observational biases or sheer coincidence.245
The Oort cloud is a theorized spherical shell of up to a trillion icy objects that is thought to be the source for all long-period comets,246247 which wer
e originally ejected from the planetary region by gravitational interactions with the gas giants.248 Oort cloud objects move very slowly, and can be perturbed by infrequent events, such as collisions, the gravitational effects of a passing star, or the galactic tide, the tidal force exerted by the Milky Way.246247 No direct observation of the Oort cloud is possible with present imaging technology.249
The Oort cloud is theorized to surround the Solar System from potentially ~2,000AU from the Sun 
to up to ~200,000AU. Lower estimates for the radius of the Oort cloud, by contrast, do not place it farther than 50,000AU.250 Most of the mass is orbiting in the region between 3,000 and 100,000AU.251 The furthest known objects, such as Comet West, have aphelia around 70,000AU from the Sun.252
Solid objects smaller than one meter are usually called meteoroids and micrometeoroids (grain-sized), with the exact division between the two categories being debated over the years.253 By 2017, the IAU de
signated any solid object having a diameter between ~30micrometers and 1meter as meteoroids, and depreciated the micrometeoroid categorization, instead terms smaller particles simply as 'dust particles'.254
Some meteoroids formed via disintegration of comets and asteroids, while a few formed via impact debris ejected from planetary bodies. Most meteoroids are made of silicates and heavier metals like nickel and iron.255 When passing through the Solar System, comets produce a trail of meteoroids;
 it is hypothesized that this is caused either by vaporization of the comet's material or by simple breakup of dormant comets. When crossing an atmosphere, these meteoroids will produce bright streaks in the sky due to atmospheric entry, called meteors. If a stream of meteoroids enter the atmosphere on parallel trajectories, the meteors will seemingly 'radiate' from a point in the sky, hence the phenomenon's name: meteor shower.256
The inner Solar System is home to the zodiacal dust cloud, which
 is visible as the hazy zodiacal light in dark, unpolluted skies. It may be generated by collisions within the asteroid belt brought on by gravitational interactions with the planets; a more recent proposed origin is materials from planet Mars.257 The outer Solar System hosts a cosmic dust cloud. It extends from about 10AU to about 40AU, and was probably created by collisions within the Kuiper belt.258259
Comets are small Solar System bodies, typically only a few kilometers across, composed larg
ely of volatile ices. They have highly eccentric orbits, generally a perihelion within the orbits of the inner planets and an aphelion far beyond Pluto. When a comet enters the inner Solar System, its proximity to the Sun causes its icy surface to sublimate and ionise, creating a coma: a long tail of gas and dust often visible to the naked eye.260
Short-period comets have orbits lasting less than two hundred years. Long-period comets have orbits lasting thousands of years. Short-period comets ar
e thought to originate in the Kuiper belt, whereas long-period comets, such as Hale–Bopp, are thought to originate in the Oort cloud. Many comet groups, such as the Kreutz sungrazers, formed from the breakup of a single parent.261 Some comets with hyperbolic orbits may originate outside the Solar System, but determining their precise orbits is difficult.262 Old comets whose volatiles have mostly been driven out by solar warming are often categorized as asteroids.263
Much of the outer reaches of 
the Solar System is still unknown. The region beyond 100 AU away is virtually unexplored and learning about this region of space is difficult. Study of this region depends upon inferences from those few objects whose orbits happen to be perturbed such that they fall closer to the Sun, and even then, detecting these objects has often been possible only when they happened to become bright enough to register as comets.264 Many objects are yet to be discovered in the Solar System's outer region.265

The Sun's Hill sphere, its gravitational potential reaching the galactic potential, the potential of the galactic nucleus, the effective range of its gravitational influence, is thought to encompass the Oort cloud,30266 and extend to up to 230,000AU from the Sun.8
The boundaries of the heliosphere and of the Hill sphere, the Sun's gravitational potential in respect to the interstellar medium and the galactic gravitational potential, at the edge of the Oort cloud, represent the boundaries of the 
Solar System with the galactic environment it is in.
The Sun's stellar-wind bubble, the heliosphere, a region of space dominated by the Sun, has its boundary at the termination shock. Based on the Sun's peculiar motion relative to the local standard of rest, this boundary is roughly 80–100AU from the Sun upwind of the interstellar medium and roughly 200AU from the Sun downwind.267 Here the solar wind collides with the interstellar medium268 and dramatically slows, condenses and becomes more turb
ulent, forming a great oval structure known as the heliosheath.267
The heliosheath has been theorized to look and behave very much like a comet's tail, extending outward for a further 40AU on the upwind side but tailing many times that distance downwind to possibly several thousands of AU.269270 Evidence from the Cassini and Interstellar Boundary Explorer spacecraft has suggested that it is forced into a bubble shape by the constraining action of the interstellar magnetic field,271272 but the ac
tual shape remains unknown.273
The shape and form of the outer edge of the heliosphere is likely affected by the fluid dynamics of interactions with the interstellar medium as well as solar magnetic fields prevailing to the south, e.g. it is bluntly shaped with the northern hemisphere extending 9AU farther than the southern hemisphere.267 The heliopause is considered the beginning of the interstellar medium.98 Beyond the heliopause, at around 230AU, lies the bow shock: a plasma "wake" left by th
e Sun as it travels through the Milky Way.274 Large objects outside the heliopause remain gravitationally bound to the Sun, but the flow of matter in the interstellar medium homogenizes the distribution of micro-scale objects.98
Within 10light-years of the Sun there are relatively few stars, the closest being the triple star system Alpha Centauri, which is about 4.4light-years away and may be in the Local Bubble's G-Cloud.276 Alpha Centauri A and B are a closely tied pair of Sun-like stars, wher
eas the closest star to the Sun, the small red dwarf Proxima Centauri, orbits the pair at a distance of 0.2light-years. In 2016, a potentially habitable exoplanet was found to be orbiting Proxima Centauri, called Proxima Centauri b, the closest confirmed exoplanet to the Sun.277
The Solar System is surrounded by the Local Interstellar Cloud, although it is not clear if it is embedded in the Local Interstellar Cloud or if it lies just outside the cloud's edge.278 Multiple other interstellar cloud
s exist in the region within 300light-years of the Sun, known as the Local Bubble.278 The latter feature is an hourglass-shaped cavity or superbubble in the interstellar medium roughly 300light-years across. The bubble is suffused with high-temperature plasma, suggesting that it may be the product of several recent supernovae.279
The Local Bubble is a small superbubble compared to the neighboring wider Radcliffe Wave and Split linear structures (formerly Gould Belt), each of which are some thous
ands of light-years in length.280 All these structures are part of the Orion Arm, which contains most of the stars in the Milky Way that are visible to the unaided eye.281
Groups of stars form together in star clusters, before dissolving into co-moving associations. A prominent grouping that is visible to the naked eye is the Ursa Major moving group, which is around 80 light-years away within the Local Bubble. The nearest star cluster is Hyades, which lies at the edge of the Local Bubble. The cl
osest star-forming regions are the Corona Australis Molecular Cloud, the Rho Ophiuchi cloud complex and the Taurus molecular cloud; the latter lies just beyond the Local Bubble and is part of the Radcliffe wave.282
Stellar flybys that pass within 0.8 light-years of the Sun occur roughly once every 100,000years. The closest well-measured approach was Scholz's Star, which approached to ~50,000AU of the Sun some ~70thousand years ago, likely passing through the outer Oort cloud.283 There is a 1% ch
ance every billion years that a star will pass within 100AU of the Sun, potentially disrupting the Solar System.284
The Solar System is located in the Milky Way, a barred spiral galaxy with a diameter of about 100,000light-years containing more than 100billion stars.285 The Sun is part of one of the Milky Way's outer spiral arms, known as the Orion–Cygnus Arm or Local Spur.286287 It is a member of the thin disk population of stars orbiting close to the galactic plane.288
Its speed around the cen
ter of the Milky Way is about 220km/s, so that it completes one revolution every 240million years.285 This revolution is known as the Solar System's galactic year.289 The solar apex, the direction of the Sun's path through interstellar space, is near the constellation Hercules in the direction of the current location of the bright star Vega.290 The plane of the ecliptic lies at an angle of about 60° to the galactic plane.c
The Sun follows a nearly circular orbit around the Galactic Center  at a 
distance of 26,660light-years,292 orbiting at roughly the same speed as that of the spiral arms.293 If it orbited close to the center, gravitational tugs from nearby stars could perturb bodies in the Oort cloud and send many comets into the inner Solar System, producing collisions with potentially catastrophic implications for life on Earth. In this scenario, the intense radiation of the Galactic Center could interfere with the development of complex life.293
The Solar System's location in the M
ilky Way is a factor in the evolutionary history of life on Earth. Spiral arms are home to a far larger concentration of supernovae, gravitational instabilities, and radiation that could disrupt the Solar System, but since Earth stays in the Local Spur and therefore does not pass frequently through spiral arms, this has given Earth long periods of stability for life to evolve.293 However, according to the controversial Shiva hypothesis, the changing position of the Solar System relative to other
 parts of the Milky Way could explain periodic extinction events on Earth.294295
Humanity's knowledge of the Solar System has grown incrementally over the centuries. Up to the Late Middle Ages–Renaissance, astronomers from Europe to India believed Earth to be stationary at the center of the universe296 and categorically different from the divine or ethereal objects that moved through the sky. Although the Greek philosopher Aristarchus of Samos had speculated on a heliocentric reordering of the c
osmos, Nicolaus Copernicus was the first person known to have developed a mathematically predictive heliocentric system.297298
Heliocentrism did not triumph immediately over geocentrism, but the work of Copernicus had its champions, notably Johannes Kepler. Using a heliocentric model that improved upon Copernicus by allowing orbits to be elliptical, and the precise observational data of Tycho Brahe, Kepler produced the Rudolphine Tables, which enabled accurate computations of the positions of th
e then-known planets. Pierre Gassendi used them to predict a transit of Mercury in 1631, and Jeremiah Horrocks did the same for a transit of Venus in 1639. This provided a strong vindication of heliocentrism and Kepler's elliptical orbits.299300
In the 17th century, Galileo publicized the use of the telescope in astronomy; he and Simon Marius independently discovered that Jupiter had four satellites in orbit around it.301 Christiaan Huygens followed on from these observations by discovering Satu
rn's moon Titan and the shape of the rings of Saturn.302 In 1677, Edmond Halley observed a transit of Mercury across the Sun, leading him to realize that observations of the solar parallax of a planet (more ideally using the transit of Venus) could be used to trigonometrically determine the distances between Earth, Venus, and the Sun.303 Halley's friend Isaac Newton, in his magisterial Principia Mathematica of 1687, demonstrated that celestial bodies are not quintessentially different from Earth
ly ones: the same laws of motion and of gravity apply on Earth and in the skies.63142
The term "Solar System" entered the English language by 1704, when John Locke used it to refer to the Sun, planets, and comets.304 In 1705, Halley realized that repeated sightings of a comet were of the same object, returning regularly once every 75–76years. This was the first evidence that anything other than the planets repeatedly orbited the Sun,305 though Seneca had theorized this about comets in the 1st ce
ntury.306 Careful observations of the 1769 transit of Venus allowed astronomers to calculate the average Earth–Sun distance as 93,726,900 miles (150,838,800km), only 0.8% greater than the modern value.307
Uranus, having occasionally been observed since 1690 and possibly from antiquity, was recognized to be a planet orbiting beyond Saturn by 1783.308 In 1838, Friedrich Bessel successfully measured a stellar parallax, an apparent shift in the position of a star created by Earth's motion around the
 Sun, providing the first direct, experimental proof of heliocentrism.309 Neptune was identified as a planet some years later, in 1846, thanks to its gravitational pull causing a slight but detectable variation in the orbit of Uranus.310 Mercury's orbital anomaly observations led to searches for Vulcan, a planet interior of Mercury, but these attempts were quashed with Albert Einstein's theory of general relativity in 1915.311
In the 20th century, humans began their space exploration around the 
Solar System, starting with placing telescopes in space since the 1960s.312 By 1989, all eight planets have been visited by space probes.313 Probes have returned samples from comets314 and asteroids,315 as well as flown through the Sun's corona316 and visited two dwarf planets (Pluto and Ceres).317318 To save on fuel, some space missions make use of gravity assist maneuvers, such as the two Voyager probes accelerating when flying by planets in the outer Solar System319 and the Parker Solar Probe
 decelerating closer towards the Sun after its flyby of Venus.320
Humans have landed on the Moon during the Apollo program in the 1960s and 1970s321 and are planning to return to the Moon in the 2020s with the Artemis program.322 Discoveries in the 20th and 21st century has prompted the redefinition of the term planet in 2006, hence the demotion of Pluto to a dwarf planet,323 and further interest in trans-Neptunian objects.324

A black hole is an astronomical body so compact that its gravity prevents anything, including light, from escaping. Albert Einstein's theory of general relativity, which describes gravitation as the curvature of spacetime, predicts that any sufficiently compact mass will form a black hole.4 The boundary of no escape is called the event horizon. In general relativity, crossing a black hole's event horizon traps an object inside but produces no locally detectable change. General relativity also pr
edicts that every black hole should have a central singularity, where the curvature of spacetime is infinite.
Objects whose gravitational fields are too strong for light to escape were first considered in the 18th century. In 1916, the first solution of general relativity that would characterise a black hole was found. By the late 1950s, this solution began to be interpreted physically as a region of space from which nothing can escape. Black holes were long considered a mathematical curiosity; 
it was not until the 1960s that theoretical work showed they were a generic prediction of general relativity. The first widely accepted black hole was Cygnus X-1, identified by several researchers independently in 1971.
Black holes typically form when very massive stars collapse at the end of their life cycle. After a black hole has formed, it can grow by absorbing mass from its surroundings. Supermassive black holes of millions of solar masses may form by absorbing stars and merging with other 
black holes, or via direct collapse of gas clouds. There is consensus that supermassive black holes exist in the centres of most galaxies.
Quantum field theory in curved spacetime predicts that event horizons emit Hawking radiation, with its rate of emission being inversely proportional to its mass. This causes the black hole to lose mass very slowly, provided it is not accreting matter. However, even the smallest class of black holes observed, stellar black holes, are gaining mass from the cosm
ic microwave background faster than they are losing mass via Hawking radiation.
The presence of a black hole can be inferred through its interaction with matter and electromagnetic radiation such as visible light. Matter falling toward a black hole can form an accretion disk of infalling plasma, heated by friction and emitting light. In extreme cases, this creates a quasar, some of the brightest objects in the universe. Merging black holes can be detected by the gravitational waves they emit. If
 stars are orbiting a black hole, their motions can be used to determine the black hole's mass and location. In this way, astronomers have identified numerous stellar black hole candidates in binary systems and established that the radio source known as Sagittarius A*, at the core of the Milky Way galaxy, contains a supermassive black hole of about 4.3million solar masses.
The idea of a body so massive that even light could not escape was first proposed in the late 18th century by English astron
omer and clergyman John Michell and independently by French scientist Pierre-Simon Laplace. Both scholars proposed very large stars in contrast to the modern concept of an extremely dense object.5
Michell's idea, in a short part of a letter published in 1784,6 calculated that a star with the same density but 500 times the radius of the sun would not let any emitted light escape; the surface escape velocity would exceed the speed of light.7122 Michell correctly hypothesized that such non-radiatin
g bodies might be detectable through their gravitational effects on nearby visible bodies. In 1796, while speculating on the origin of the Solar System in his book Exposition du Système du Monde, Laplace made a qualitative suggestion that a star could be invisible if it were sufficiently large. Franz Xaver von Zach asked Laplace for a mathematical analysis, which Laplace provided and published in von Zach's journal Allgemeine Geographische Ephemeridende.5
In 1905, Albert Einstein showed that the
 laws of electromagnetism are identical for observers travelling at different velocities relative to each other. The laws of mechanics had already been shown to be invariant in this way. However, the theory of gravitation was yet to be included.819
In 1907, Einstein published a paper proposing his equivalence principle, the hypothesis that inertial mass and gravitational mass have a common cause. Using the principle, Einstein predicted the redshift and the lensing effect of gravity on light; his
 prediction of gravitational lensing was one-half of the value that the full theory of general relativity would predict.819 By 1915, Einstein refined these ideas into his general theory of relativity, which explained how matter affects spacetime, which in turn affects the motion of other matter.910 This formed the basis for black hole physics.11
Only a few months after Einstein published the field equations describing general relativity, astrophysicist Karl Schwarzschild set out to apply the ide
a to stars. He assumed spherical symmetry with no spin and found a solution to Einstein's equations.712412 A few months after Schwarzschild, Johannes Droste, a student of Hendrik Lorentz, independently gave the same solution.1314 At a certain radius from the centre of the mass, the Schwarzschild solution became singular, meaning that some of the terms in the Einstein equations became infinite. The nature of this radius, which later became known as the Schwarzschild radius, was not understood at 
the time.15
Many physicists of the early 20th century were sceptical of the existence of black holes. In a 1926 popular science book, Arthur Eddington critiqued the idea of a star with mass compressed to its Schwarzschild radius as a flaw in the then-poorly-understood theory of general relativity.167134 In 1939, Einstein used his theory of general relativity in an attempt to prove that black holes were impossible.1718 His work relied on increasing pressure or increasing centrifugal force balanci
ng the force of gravity so that the object would not collapse beyond its Schwarzschild radius. He missed the possibility that implosion would drive the system below this critical value.7135
By the 1920s, astronomers had classified a number of white dwarf stars as too cool and dense to be explained by the gradual cooling of ordinary stars. In 1926, Ralph Fowler showed that these stars are not like main-sequence stars, where thermal pressure balances gravity. Instead, a type of quantum-mechanical 
pressure balances gravity at these temperatures and densities.7145 In 1931, Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar studied the new state of matter that results from this balance, called electron-degenerate matter, discovering that it is stable below a certain limiting mass. By 1934 he showed that this explained the catalogue of white dwarf stars.7151 When Chandrasekhar announced his results, Eddington pointed out that stars above this limit would radiate until they were sufficiently dense to prevent light f
rom exiting, a conclusion he considered absurd. Eddington and, later, Lev Landau argued that some yet unknown mechanism would stop the collapse.19
In the 1930s, Fritz Zwicky and Walter Baade studied stellar novae, focusing on exceptionally bright ones they called supernovae. Zwicky promoted the idea that supernovae produced stars with the density of atomic nuclei—neutron stars—but this idea was largely ignored at the time.7171 In 1939, based on Chandrasekhar's reasoning, but working within gener
al relativity rather than Newtonian gravity, J. Robert Oppenheimer and George Volkoff predicted that neutron stars below a certain mass limit, later called the Tolman–Oppenheimer–Volkoff limit, would be stable due to neutron degeneracy pressure.7193 Above that limit, they reasoned that either their model would not apply or that gravitational contraction would not stop.20380
John Archibald Wheeler and two of his students resolved questions about the model behind the Tolman–Oppenheimer–Volkoff (TO
V) limit. In 1965, Harrison and Wheeler developed the equations of state relating density to pressure for cold matter all the way through electron degeneracy and neutron degeneracy. Masami Wakano and Wheeler then used the equations to compute the equilibrium curve for stars, relating mass to circumference. They found no additional features that would invalidate the TOV limit. This meant that the only thing that could prevent black holes from forming was a dynamic process ejecting sufficient mass
 from a star as it cooled.7205
The modern concept of black holes was formulated by Robert Oppenheimer and his student Hartland Snyder in 1939.172180 In the paper,22 Oppenheimer and Snyder solved Einstein's equations of general relativity for an idealised imploding star, in a model later called the Oppenheimer–Snyder model, then described the results from far outside the star. The implosion starts as one might expect: the star material rapidly collapses inward. However, as the density of the star
 increases, gravitational time dilation increases and the collapse, viewed from afar, seems to slow down further and further until the star reaches its Schwarzschild radius, where it appears frozen in time.7217
In 1958, David Finkelstein identified the Schwarzschild surface as an event horizon, calling it "a perfect unidirectional membrane: causal influences can cross it in only one direction". This means that events that occur inside the black hole cannot affect events that occur outside the bl
ack hole.23 Finkelstein created a new reference frame to include the point of view of infalling observers.21103 Finkelstein's new frame of reference allowed events at the surface of an imploding star to be related to events far away. By 1962 the two points of view were reconciled, convincing many sceptics that implosion into a black hole made physical sense.7226
The era from the mid-1960s to the mid-1970s was the "golden age of black hole research", when general relativity and black holes became
 mainstream subjects of research.257258
In this period, solutions to the equations of general relativity under various different physical constraints were discovered. In 1963, Roy Kerr found the exact solution for a rotating black hole.26 Two years later, Ezra Newman found the axisymmetric solution for a black hole that is both rotating and electrically charged.27
In the late 1960s and early 1970s scientists from research groups formed by Yakov Zeldovich, John Archibald Wheeler and Dennis W. Sci
ama discovered a series of important mathematical properties of black hole models dubbed "a black hole has no hair" by Wheeler.7272 The first hints came from work by Vitaly Ginzburg who studied a series of increasing compact stars threaded with intense magnetic fields. He discovered that the fields get trapped on the black hole surface. In 1967, Werner Israel showed that any non-spinning, uncharged collapsing star gives a spherically symmetric black hole: any asymmetry must somehow vanish. In 19
72, Richard H. Price found that the asymmetry was converted into gravitational waves. It took another 15 years and many physicists to produce a body of work that became known as the no-hair theorem, which states that a stationary black hole is completely described by the three parameters of the Kerr–Newman metric: mass, angular momentum, and electric charge.7285
At first, it was suspected that the strange mathematical singularities found in each of the black hole solutions only appeared due to t
he assumption that a black hole would be perfectly spherically symmetric, and therefore the singularities would not appear in generic situations where black holes would not necessarily be symmetric. This view was held in particular by Vladimir Belinski, Isaak Khalatnikov, and Evgeny Lifshitz, who tried to prove that no singularities appear in generic solutions, although they would later reverse their positions.28 However, in 1965, Roger Penrose proved that general relativity predicts that singul
arities appear in all black holes,29 although this may not still hold when quantum mechanics is taken into account.30
Astronomical observations also made great strides during this era. In 1967, Antony Hewish and Jocelyn Bell Burnell discovered pulsars and by 1969, these were shown to be rapidly rotating neutron stars. Until that time, neutron stars, like black holes, were regarded as just theoretical curiosities, but the discovery of pulsars showed their physical relevance and spurred a further 
interest in all types of compact objects that might be formed by gravitational collapse.31 However, experimental evidence confirming a black hole was very difficult to obtain and ultimately required efforts from many astronomers. X-ray telescope observations by Riccardo Giacconi's team in 1971 showed that Cygnus X-1 emitted x-rays in rapid, sporadic fashion consistent with a compact source. This became the first candidate black hole.21153 Optical spectroscopy and detailed astrophysical models fo
r Cygnus X-1 were consistent with a binary system of a massive star and compact star generating x-rays as gas from the massive but ordinary star was sucked into its invisible compact companion. 32 By 1974 the object was widely considered to be a black hole, but 100% confidence for Cygnus X-1 may not be possible.7317
Work by James Bardeen, Carter, and Hawking in the early 1970s led to the formulation of black hole thermodynamics. These laws describe the behaviour of a black hole in a manner analo
gous to the laws of thermodynamics. Jacob Bekenstein strengthened this analogy with the properties of mass, surface area, and surface gravity for a black hole related to the thermodynamical concepts of energy, entropy, and temperature respectively. The analogy was completed7442 when Hawking, in 1974, showed that quantum field theory implies that black holes should radiate like a black body with a temperature proportional to the surface gravity of the black hole, predicting the effect now known a
s Hawking radiation.33415
While Cygnus X-1, a stellar-mass black hole, was generally accepted by the scientific community as a black hole by the end of 1973,34 it would be decades before a supermassive black hole would gain the same broad recognition. The idea that such objects might exist began with models suggesting that powerful quasars or active galactic nuclei in the centre of galaxies were powered by accreting supermassive black holes. When the Hubble Space Telescope launched in the 1990s,
 optical studies of the centre of galaxy Messier 87 showed it must have a large concentration of mass. The two candidates for this mass were a black hole and a dense cluster of stars. In 1995, interferometric microwave spectra from the Very Long Baseline Array observed H2O masers as they orbited the centre of NGC 4258, a galaxy with a similar central mass. The orbital parameters ruled out dense stellar clusters as an explanation for galactic nuclei, making supermassive black holes the only plaus
ible explanation.35
In 1999, David Merritt proposed the M–sigma relation, which related the dispersion of the velocity of matter in the centre bulge of a galaxy to the mass of the supermassive black hole at its core.36 Subsequent studies confirmed this correlation.37 Around the same time, based on telescope observations of the velocities of stars at the centre of the Milky Way galaxy, independent work groups led by Andrea Ghez and Reinhard Genzel concluded that the compact radio source in the ce
ntre of the galaxy, Sagittarius A*, was likely a supermassive black hole.3839
In late 2015, the LIGO Scientific Collaboration and Virgo Collaboration made the first direct detection of gravitational waves, named GW150914, representing the first observation of a black hole merger.40 At the time of the merger, the black holes were approximately 1.4 billion light-years away from Earth and had masses roughly 30 and 35 times that of the Sun.416 In 2017, Rainer Weiss, Kip Thorne, and Barry Barish, who
 had spearheaded the project, were awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics for their work.42 Since the initial discovery in 2015, hundreds more gravitational waves have been observed.43
On 10 April 2019, the first direct image of a black hole and its vicinity was published, following observations made by the Event Horizon Telescope (EHT) of the supermassive black hole in Messier 87's galactic centre.44 In 2022, the Event Horizon Telescope collaboration released an image of the black hole in the cente
r of the Milky Way galaxy, Sagittarius A*; the data had been collected in 2017.45
In 2020, the Nobel Prize in Physics was awarded for work on black holes. Andrea Ghez and Reinhard Genzel shared one-half for their discovery that Sagittarius A* is a supermassive black hole.46 Penrose received the other half for his work showing that the mathematics of general relativity requires the formation of black holes.47 Cosmologists lamented that Hawking's extensive theoretical work on black holes would not
 be honoured since he had died in 2018.48
In December 1967, someone in the audience reportedly suggested the phrase black hole at a lecture by John Wheeler; Wheeler adopted the term for its brevity and "advertising value", and Wheeler's stature in the field ensured it quickly caught on,2149 leading some to credit Wheeler with coining the phrase.50 However, the term was used by others around that time. Science writer Marcia Bartusiak traces the term black hole to physicist Robert H. Dicke, who in
 the early 1960s reportedly compared the phenomenon to the Black Hole of Calcutta, notorious as a prison where people entered but never left alive.
The term was used in print by Life and Science News magazines in 1963, and by science journalist Ann Ewing in her article "'Black Holes' in Space", dated 18 January 1964, which was a report on a meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science held in Cleveland, Ohio.21
A black hole is generally defined as a region of spacetime from
 which no information-carrying signals or objects can escape.51 However, verifying an object as a black hole by this definition would require waiting for an infinite time and at an infinite distance from the black hole to verify that nothing has escaped, and thus cannot be used to identify a physical black hole.52 There are several other definitions that can be used to describe or identify black holes, leading to a variety of ways to study them. Astronomical observations measure the mass of obje
cts and gravitational collapse theories predict that a compact object with a mass larger than three solar masses can only be a black hole: this limit has become the observational definition.53 A black hole may also be defined as a reservoir of information54142 or a region where space is falling inwards faster than the speed of light.5556
The no-hair theorem establishes that, once it achieves a stable condition after formation, a black hole has only three independent physical properties: mass, el
ectric charge, and angular momentum; the black hole is otherwise featureless. Any two black holes that share the same values for these properties, or parameters, are indistinguishable from one another. A related no hair conjecture proposes that dynamic gravitational collapse always results in an object characterized with only these three properties.57 The conjecture is currently an unsolved problem.58 The no hair theorem also makes idealized assumptions in addition to equilibrium that may not ap
ply to astrophysical objects.59
The simplest equilibrium black hole model with only mass but neither electric charge nor angular momentum is called a Schwarzschild black hole. Non-rotating charged black holes are described by the Reissner–Nordström metric, while the Kerr metric describes a non-charged rotating black hole. The most general stationary black hole solution known is the Kerr–Newman metric, which describes a black hole with both charge and angular momentum.60
The simplest static black
 holes have mass but neither electric charge nor angular momentum. Contrary to the popular notion of a black hole "sucking in everything" in its surroundings, from far away, the external gravitational field of a black hole is identical to that of any other body of the same mass.61
While a black hole can theoretically have any positive mass, its charge and angular momentum are limited by its mass, with this limit being greater for more massive black holes. The net electric charge
is the gravitati
onal constant. Black holes with the maximum possible combination of charge and spin satisfying this inequality are called extremal black holes. Adding a low-mass object with a lot of charge or angular momentum to an extremal black hole would create a so-called naked singularity, a singularity outside of a black hole.62 Because these singularities make the universe inherently unpredictable, many physicists believe they could not exist.63 The weak cosmic censorship hypothesis, proposed by Penrose,
 rules out the formation of such singularities, when they are created through the gravitational collapse of realistic matter. This hypothesis remains an important area of study because has not yet been proven and it relates to many aspects of general relativity and quantum gravity.64
The total mass of a nearby black hole can be estimated by analysing the motion of the stars or gas surrounding it. The mass of distant supermassive black holes can be inferred from Doppler broadening of spectral lin
es emitted by rapidly orbiting gas, a technique called reverberation mapping.65
All black holes spin, often fast—One stellar black hole, GRS 1915+105, has been estimated to spin at over 1,000 revolutions per second.66 The Milky Way's central black hole Sagittarius A* rotates at about 90% of the maximum possible rate.67
The spin rate can be inferred from measurements of atomic spectral lines in the X-ray range. As gas near the black hole plunges inward, high energy X-ray emission from electron-po
sitron pairs illuminates the gas further out, appearing red-shifted due to relativistic effects. Depending on the spin of the black hole, this plunge happens at different radii from the hole, with different degrees of redshift. Astronomers can use the gap between the x-ray emission of the outer disk and the redshifted emission from plunging material to determine the spin of the black hole.68
A newer way to estimate spin is based on the temperature of gases accreting onto the black hole. The meth
od requires an independent measurement of the black hole mass and inclination angle of the accretion disk followed by computer modelling. Gravitational waves from coalescing binary black holes can also provide the spin of both progenitor black holes and the merged hole, but such events are rare.68
A spinning black hole has angular momentum. The Kerr metric is the solution of Einstein's field equations for a rotating black hole. In addition to the Schwarzschild radius,
is the black hole angular m
omentum. An extremal black hole has
.69467 The supermassive black hole in the centre of the Messier 87 (M87) galaxy appears to have rotational parameter of 0.90±0.05, very close to the maximum theoretical value.70
Black holes are believed to have an approximately neutral charge. For example, Michal Zajaček, Arman Tursunov, Andreas Eckart, and Silke Britzen found the electric charge of Sagittarius A* to be at least ten orders of magnitude below the theoretical maximum.71 If a black hole were to b
ecome charged, particles with an opposite sign of charge would be pulled in by the extra electromagnetic force, while particles with the same sign of charge would be repelled, neutralising the black hole. This effect operates even more rapidly if the black hole is also spinning.72 A spinning black hole in a magnetic field creates an electric field which would interact with charged particles.71 Since black holes have so few measurable intrinsic properties, techniques for measuring charge are of i
nterest to astrophysics even if the values may be very small.73
The charge Q for a nonspinning black hole is bounded by
where G is the gravitational constant and M is the black hole's mass.74
Black holes are classified by the theory of their formation and by their mass , but these criteria are intertwined. Stellar black holes are formed by stellar collapse. The minimum mass of a black hole formed by stellar gravitational collapse is governed by the maximum mass of a neutron star and is believed 
to be 2-4M☉.76 Hypothetical primordial black holes, believed to have formed soon after the Big Bang, could be far smaller, with masses as little as 10−5grams at formation.77 These very small black holes are sometimes called micro black holes.7879
Stellar black holes can have a wide range of masses. Estimates of their maximum mass at formation vary, but generally range from 10-100M☉, with higher estimates for black holes progenated by low-metallicity stars.80 Stellar black holes can gain mass via
 accretion of nearby matter, often from a companion object such as a star8182 or by merger with another black hole.40
A small number of candidate black holes with masses in the range 102-104M☉ have been reported. These are larger than stellar black holes but smaller than supermassive black holes, are rarer than either extreme, and are called intermediate-mass black holes.75 Physicists have speculated that such black holes may form from collisions in globular and star clusters or at the centre of
 low-mass galaxies.83 They may also form as the result of mergers of smaller black holes, with several gravitational wave measurements consistent with merged black holes within 110–350M☉.84
The black holes with the largest masses are called supermassive black holes, with masses more than 106M☉.85 These black holes are believed to exist at the centres of almost every large galaxy, including the Milky Way.86 Some scientists have proposed a subcategory of even larger black holes, called ultramassiv
e black holes, with masses greater than 109-1010M☉.8788 Theoretical models predict that the accretion disc that feeds black holes will be unstable once a black hole reaches 50×109–100×109M☉, setting a rough upper limit to black hole mass.8990
While black holes are conceptually invisible sinks of all matter and light, in astronomical settings, their enormous gravity alters the motion of surrounding objects and pulls nearby gas inwards at near-light speed, making the area around black holes the br
ightest objects in the universe.91
Some black holes have relativistic jets—thin streams of plasma travelling away from the black hole at more than 90% of the speed of light.92 A small fraction of the matter falling towards the black hole gets accelerated away along the hole rotation axis.93 These jets can extend as far as millions of light-years from the black hole itself.94
Black holes of any mass can have jets.95 However, they are typically observed around spinning black holes with strongly-ma
gnetized accretion disks.9697 Relativistic jets were more common in the early universe, when galaxies and their corresponding supermassive black holes were rapidly gaining mass.9698 All black holes with jets also have an accretion disk,92 but the jets are usually brighter than the disk.99 Quasars, typically found in other galaxies, are believed to be supermassive black holes with jets; microquasars are believed to be stellar-mass objects with jets, typically observed in the Milky Way.100
The jet
s can be powered by either the accretion disk or the rotating black hole spin. While many details of the jets have been studied, no complete model has emerged. One method proposed to fuel these jets is the Blandford-Znajek process, which suggests that the dragging of magnetic field lines by a black hole's rotation could launch jets of matter into space.96 The Penrose process, which involves extraction of a black hole's rotational energy, has also been proposed as a potential mechanism of jet pro
pulsion.101102 There is evidence that jets at all scales, from microquasars to gamma ray bursts may be produced by a single mechanism.95
Due to conservation of angular momentum, gas falling into the gravitational well created by a massive object will typically form a disk-like structure around the object.105242 As the disk's angular momentum is transferred outward due to processes such as turbulence in the disk, its matter falls farther inward, converting its gravitational energy into heat and r
eleasing a large amount of radiation; absent an explosive event, the radiation pressure limits the accretion rate.106165 The temperature of these disks can range from thousands to millions of kelvins, and temperatures differ throughout a single accretion disk.107108 Accretion disks radiate across the entire electromagnetic spectrum, depending on the disk's turbulence and magnetisation and the black hole's mass and angular momentum.109
Accretion disks can be defined as geometrically thin or geome
trically thick. Geometrically thin disks are mostly confined to the black hole's equatorial plane and have a well-defined edge at the innermost stable circular orbit (ISCO), while geometrically thick disks are supported by internal pressure and temperature and can extend inside the ISCO. Disks with high rates of electron scattering and absorption, appearing bright and opaque, are called optically thick; optically thin disks are more translucent and produce fainter images when viewed from afar.11
0 Accretion disks of black holes accreting beyond the Eddington limit are often referred to as polish donuts due to their thick, toroidal shape that resembles that of a donut.111112
Quasar accretion disks are expected to have a "blue spectral shape", meaning that the flux per frequency
; this was not originally observed due to emission from dust surrounding the objects.113 The disk for a stellar black hole, on the other hand, would likely look orange, yellow, or red, with its inner regions being
 the brightest.114 Accretion disk colours may also be altered by the Doppler effect, with the part of the disk travelling towards an observer appearing bluer and brighter and the part of the disk travelling away from the observer appearing redder and dimmer.115116
In Newtonian gravity, test particles can stably orbit at arbitrary distances from a central object. In general relativity, however, there exists a smallest possible radius for which a massive particle can orbit stably. Any infinitesima
l inward perturbations to this orbit will lead to the particle spiralling into the black hole, and any outward perturbations will, depending on the energy, cause the particle to spiral in, move to a stable orbit further from the black hole, or escape to infinity. This orbit is called the innermost stable circular orbit, or ISCO.118 In the case of a Schwarzschild black hole (spin zero) and a particle without spin, the location of the ISCO is:
is the Schwarzschild radius of the black hole,
is the 
speed of light.119 For spinning black holes, the ISCO is moved inwards for particles orbiting in the same direction that the black hole is spinning (prograde) and outwards for particles orbiting in the opposite direction (retrograde). For example, the ISCO for a particle orbiting retrograde can be as far out as about
, while the ISCO for a particle orbiting prograde can be as close as at the event horizon itself. The radius of this orbit changes slightly based on particle spin.120
For charged bl
ack holes, the ISCO moves inwards.121
The photon sphere is a spherical boundary for which photons moving on tangents to that sphere are bent completely around the black hole, possibly orbiting multiple times.122 For Schwarzschild black holes, the photon sphere has a radius 1.5 times the Schwarzschild radius.123124
While light can still escape from the photon sphere, any light that crosses the photon sphere on an inbound trajectory will be captured by the black hole. Therefore, any light that rea
ches an outside observer from the photon sphere must have been emitted by objects between the photon sphere and the event horizon.125 Light emitted towards the photon sphere may also curve around the black hole and return to the emitter.126
For a rotating, uncharged black hole, the radius of the photon sphere depends on the spin parameter and whether the photon is orbiting prograde or retrograde.119 For a photon orbiting prograde, the photon sphere will be 0.5-1.5 Schwarzschild radii from the ce
ntre of the black hole, while for a photon orbiting retrograde, the photon sphere will be between 3-4 Schwarzschild radii from the centre of the black hole. The exact locations of the photon spheres depend on the magnitude of the black hole's rotation.127 For a charged, nonrotating black hole, there will only be one photon sphere, and the radius of the photon sphere will decrease for increasing black hole charge.128 For non-extremal, charged, rotating black holes, there will always be two photon
 spheres, with the exact radii depending on the parameters of the black hole.129
When viewed from a great distance, the photon sphere creates an observable black hole shadow, a dark silhouette of the black hole against the background stars. Images such as those taken by the Event Horizon Telescope show the black hole shadow, not the event horizon itself.130 Since no light emerges from within the black hole, this shadow is the limit for possible observations.106152 The shadow of colliding black h
oles should have characteristic warped shapes, allowing scientists to detect black holes that are about to merge.125
Near a rotating black hole, spacetime rotates similar to a vortex. The rotating spacetime will drag any matter and light into rotation around the spinning black hole. This effect of general relativity, called frame dragging, gets stronger closer to the spinning mass. The region of spacetime in which it is impossible to stay still is called the ergosphere.68
The ergosphere of a bla
ck hole is a volume bounded by the black hole's event horizon and the ergosurface or stationary limit surface, which coincides with the event horizon at the poles but bulges out from it around the equator.131
Matter and radiation can escape from the ergosphere. Through the Penrose process, objects can emerge from the ergosphere with more energy than they entered with. The extra energy is taken from the rotational energy of the black hole, slowing down the rotation of the black hole.132268
The ob
servable region of spacetime around a black hole closest to its event horizon is called the plunging region. In this area it is no longer possible for free falling matter to follow circular orbits or stop a final descent into the black hole. Instead, it will rapidly plunge toward the black hole at close to the speed of light, growing increasingly hot and producing a characteristic, detectable thermal emission.133134 However, light and radiation emitted from this region can still escape from the 
black hole's gravitational pull.135
For a nonspinning, uncharged black hole, the radius of the event horizon, or Schwarzschild radius, is proportional to the mass, M, through
where rs is the Schwarzschild radius, G is the gravitational constant, c is the speed of light, and M☉ is the mass of the Sun.136124 A black hole of the same mass with nonzero spin has two radii:69467
Most observed black holes have close to maximum angular momentum that seems to be allowed:
For such black holes the radii wi
ll approach69467
Since the volume within the Schwarzschild radius increases with the cube of the radius, average density of a black hole inside its Schwarzschild radius is inversely proportional to the square of its mass: supermassive black holes are much less dense than stellar black holes. The average density of a 108M☉ black hole is comparable to that of water.137
The defining feature of a black hole is the existence of an event horizon, a boundary in spacetime through which matter and light 
can pass only inward towards the centre of the black hole. Nothing, not even light, can escape from inside the event horizon.138139 The event horizon is referred to as such because if an event occurs within the boundary, information from that event cannot reach or affect an outside observer, making it impossible to determine whether such an event occurred.140179
For non-rotating black holes, the geometry of the event horizon is precisely spherical, while for rotating black holes, the event horiz
on is oblate.141142131
To a distant observer, a clock near a black hole would appear to tick more slowly than one further from the black hole.143217144 This effect, known as gravitational time dilation, would also cause an object falling into a black hole to appear to slow as it approached the event horizon, never quite reaching the horizon from the perspective of an outside observer.143218 All processes on this object would appear to slow down, and any light emitted by the object to appear redd
er and dimmer, an effect known as gravitational redshift.145 An object falling from half of a Schwarzschild radius above the event horizon would fade away until it could no longer be seen, disappearing from view within one hundredth of a second for an 8M9; black hole.146 It would also appear to flatten onto the black hole, joining all other material that had ever fallen into the hole.147
On the other hand, an observer falling into a black hole would not notice any of these effects as they cross 
the event horizon. Their own clocks appear to them to tick normally, and they cross the event horizon after a finite time without noting any singular behaviour.148 In general relativity, it is impossible to determine the location of the event horizon from local observations, due to Einstein's equivalence principle.143222
Black holes that are rotating and/or charged have an inner horizon, often called the Cauchy horizon, inside of the black hole.149 The inner horizon is divided up into two segmen
ts: an ingoing section and an outgoing section.150
At the ingoing section of the Cauchy horizon, radiation and matter that fall into the black hole would build up at the horizon, causing the curvature of spacetime to go to infinity. This would cause an observer falling in to experience tidal forces.149150 This phenomenon is often called mass inflation, since it is associated with a parameter dictating the black hole's internal mass growing exponentially,149151 and the buildup of tidal forces is 
called the mass-inflation singularity152150 or Cauchy horizon singularity.153154 Some physicists have argued that in realistic black holes, accretion and Hawking radiation would stop mass inflation from occurring.155156
At the outgoing section of the inner horizon, infalling radiation would backscatter off of the black hole's spacetime curvature and travel outward, building up at the outgoing Cauchy horizon. This would cause an infalling observer to experience a gravitational shock wave and tida
l forces as the spacetime curvature at the horizon grew to infinity. This buildup of tidal forces is called the shock singularity.151150
In the Penrose-Hawking singularity theorem, both of these singularities are weak, meaning that an object crossing them would only be deformed a finite amount by tidal forces, even though the spacetime curvature would still be infinite at the singularity. This is as opposed to a strong singularity, where an object hitting the singularity would be stretched and s
queezed by an infinite amount.152151 They are also null singularities, meaning that a photon could travel parallel to them without ever being intercepted.150
Ignoring quantum effects, every black hole has a singularity inside, points where the curvature of spacetime becomes infinite, and geodesics terminate within a finite proper time.143205157 For a non-rotating black hole, this region takes the shape of a single point; for a rotating black hole it is smeared out to form a ring singularity that
 lies in the plane of rotation.143264 In both cases, the singular region has zero volume. All of the mass of the black hole ends up in the singularity.143252 Since the singularity has nonzero mass in an infinitely small space, it can be thought of as having infinite density.158
Observers falling into a Schwarzschild black hole (i.e., non-rotating and not charged) cannot avoid being carried into the singularity once they cross the event horizon.160161 As they fall further into the black hole, the
y will be torn apart by the growing tidal forces in a process sometimes referred to as spaghettification or the noodle effect. Eventually, they will reach the singularity and be crushed into an infinitely small point.140182 However, any perturbations, such as those caused by matter or radiation falling in, would cause space to oscillate chaotically near the singularity. Any matter falling in would experience intense tidal forces rapidly changing in direction, all while being compressed into an i
ncreasingly small volume.162144231
Alternative forms of general relativity, including addition of some quantum effects, can lead to regular, or nonsingular, black holes without singularities.163164 For example, the fuzzball model, based on string theory, states that black holes are actually made up of quantum microstates and need not have a singularity or an event horizon.165166 The theory of loop quantum gravity proposes that the curvature and density at the centre of a black hole is large, but
 not infinite.167
Black holes are formed by gravitational collapse of massive stars, either by direct collapse or during a supernova explosion in a process called fallback.168 Black holes can result from the merger of two neutron stars or a neutron star and a black hole.169 Other more speculative mechanisms include primordial black holes created from density fluctuations in the early universe, the collapse of dark stars, a hypothetical object powered by annihilation of dark matter, or from hypot
hetical self-interacting dark matter.170
Gravitational collapse occurs when an object's internal pressure is insufficient to resist the object's own gravity. At the end of a star's life, it will run out of hydrogen to fuse, and will start fusing more and more massive elements, until it gets to iron. Since the fusion of elements heavier than iron would require more energy than it would release, nuclear fusion ceases. If the iron core of the star is too massive, the star will no longer be able to 
support itself and will undergo gravitational collapse.171
The mass of a black hole formed via a supernova has a lower bound: if the progenitor star is too small, the collapse may be stopped by the degeneracy pressure of the star's constituents, allowing the condensation of matter into an exotic denser state. Degeneracy pressure occurs from the Pauli exclusion principle: particles will resist being in the same place as each other. Progenitor stars with masses less than about 8M☉ will become whit
e dwarfs, where the degeneracy pressure of electrons balances gravity. For more massive progenitor stars, the force of gravity overcomes electron degeneracy pressure and the star compresses until neutron degeneracy pressure resists gravity, forming a neutron star. If the star is even more massive, neutron degeneracy pressure will not be able to resist the force of gravity and the star will collapse into a black hole.1721435.8
While most of the energy released during gravitational collapse is emi
tted very quickly, an outside observer does not actually see the end of this process. Even though the collapse takes a finite amount of time from the reference frame of infalling matter, a distant observer would see the infalling material slow and halt just above the event horizon, due to gravitational time dilation. Light from the collapsing material takes longer and longer to reach the observer, with the delay growing to infinity as the emitting material reaches the event horizon. Thus the ext
ernal observer never sees the formation of the event horizon; instead, the collapsing material seems to become dimmer and increasingly red-shifted, eventually fading away.173
Observations of quasars from less than a billion years after the Big Bang174175 has led to investigations of other ways to form black holes. The accretion process to build supermassive black holes has a limiting rate of mass accumulation and a billion years is not enough time to reach quasar status. One suggestion is direct
 collapse of nearly pure hydrogen gas (low metalicity) clouds characteristic of the young universe, forming a supermassive star which collapses into a black hole. It has been suggested that seed black holes with typical masses of ~105M☉ could have formed in this way which then could grow to ~109M☉. However, the very large amount of gas required for direct collapse is not typically stable against fragmentation which would form multiple stars. Thus another approach suggests massive star formation 
followed by collisions that seed massive black holes which ultimately merge to create a quasar.17685
A neutron star in a common envelope with a regular star can accrete sufficient material to collapse to a black hole or two neutron stars can merge. These avenues for the formation of black holes are considered relatively rare.177
In the early universe, fluctuations of spacetime may have formed areas that were denser than their surroundings. Rapid early expansion of the universe may have allowed t
hese areas to collapse, forming primordial black holes.178 Various models predict the creation of primordial black holes ranging from a Planck mass (~2.2×10−8kg) to hundreds of thousands of solar masses. Primordial black holes with masses less than 1012kg would have evaporated by now due to Hawking radiation.179
Despite the early universe being extremely dense, it did not re-collapse into a black hole during the Big Bang, since the universe was expanding rapidly and did not have the gravitationa
l differential necessary for black hole formation. Models for the gravitational collapse of objects of relatively constant size, such as stars, do not necessarily apply in the same way to rapidly expanding space such as the Big Bang.180
In principle, black holes could be formed in high-energy particle collisions that achieve sufficient density, although no such events have been detected.181
These hypothetical micro black holes, which could form from the collision of cosmic rays and Earth's atmos
phere or in particle accelerators like the Large Hadron Collider, would not be able to aggregate additional mass.182 Instead, they would evaporate in about 10−25 seconds, posing no threat to the Earth.183
After a black hole forms, it may change through phenomena such as mergers, accretion of matter, and evaporation via Hawking radiation.
Black holes can merge with other objects such as stars or other black holes. This is thought to have been important, especially in the early growth of supermass
ive black holes, which could have formed from the aggregation of many smaller objects.184 The process has also been proposed as the origin of some intermediate-mass black holes.185186 Mergers of supermassive black holes may take a long time: As a binary of supermassive black holes approach each other, most nearby stars are slingshotted away, leaving little for the black holes to gravitationally interact with that would allow them to get closer to each other. This phenomenon has been called the f
inal parsec problem, as the distance at which this happens is usually around one parsec.187188
When a black hole accretes matter, the gas in the inner accretion disk orbits at very high speeds because of its proximity to the black hole. This fast-moving gas experiences friction against the slower-moving gas in the outer disk, transferring angular momentum to the outer disk. The loss of angular momentum forces the gas in the inner disk to orbit closer to the black hole, and its gravitational pote
ntial energy is converted into thermal energy. This heats the inner disk to temperatures at which it emits vast amounts of electromagnetic radiation (mainly X-rays), which is detectable by telescopes. By the time the matter of the disk reaches the ISCO, between 5.7% and 42% of its mass will have been converted to energy, depending on the black hole's spin. About 90% of this energy is released within 20 black hole radii.189 In many cases, accretion disks are accompanied by relativistic jets that 
are emitted along the black hole's poles, which carry away much of the energy.190
Many of the universe's most energetic phenomena have been attributed to the accretion of matter on black holes. Active galactic nuclei and quasars are powered by accretion onto supermassive black holes.191192 X-ray binaries are generally accepted to be binary systems in which one of the two objects is a compact object accreting matter from its companion.137 Ultraluminous X-ray sources may be the accretion disks of 
intermediate-mass black holes.193
At a certain rate of accretion, the outward radiation pressure will become as strong as the inward gravitational force, and the black hole should, in theory, be unable to accrete any faster. This limit is called the Eddington limit. Realistically, many black holes accrete beyond this rate due to their non-spherical geometry or instabilities in the accretion disk. Accretion beyond the limit is called super-Eddington accretion and may have been commonplace in the 
early universe.194195
Stars have been observed to get torn apart by tidal forces in the immediate vicinity of supermassive black holes in galaxy nuclei, in what is known as a tidal disruption event (TDE). Some of the material from the disrupted star forms an accretion disk around the black hole, which emits observable electromagnetic radiation.196197
The correlation between the masses of supermassive black holes in the centres of galaxies with the velocity dispersion and mass of stars in their h
ost bulges suggests that the formation of galaxies and the formation of their central black holes are related. Black hole winds from rapid accretion, particularly when the galaxy itself is still accreting matter, can compress gas nearby, accelerating star formation. However, if the winds become too strong, the black hole may blow nearly all of the gas out of the galaxy, quenching star formation. Black hole jets may also energise nearby cavities of plasma and eject low-entropy gas from out of the
 galactic core, causing gas in galactic centres to be hotter than expected.86
If Hawking's theory of black hole radiation is correct, then black holes are expected to shrink and evaporate over time as they lose mass by the emission of photons and other particles.33420 The temperature of this thermal spectrum (Hawking temperature) is proportional to the surface gravity of the black hole, which is inversely proportional to the mass. Hence, large black holes emit less radiation than small black hol
es.143Ch. 9.6198 A stellar black hole of 1M☉ has a Hawking temperature of 62nanokelvins.199 This is far less than the 2.7K temperature of the cosmic microwave background radiation. Stellar-mass or larger black holes receive more mass from the cosmic microwave background than they emit through Hawking radiation and thus will grow instead of shrinking.200 To have a Hawking temperature larger than 2.7K (and be able to evaporate), a black hole would need a mass less than the Moon. Such a black hole 
would have a diameter of less than a tenth of a millimetre.201
The Hawking radiation for an astrophysical black hole is predicted to be very weak and would thus be exceedingly difficult to detect from Earth. A possible exception is the microsecond-long burst of gamma rays emitted in the last stage of the evaporation of primordial black holes. Extensive searches for such radiation have proven unsuccessful and provide upper limits on the possibility of existence of low mass primordial black holes.
202
When based in general relativity, the constraints on a black hole's properties are called the laws of black hole mechanics. For a black hole that is not still forming or accreting matter, the zeroth law of black hole mechanics states the black hole's surface gravity is constant across the event horizon. The first law relates changes in the black hole's surface area, angular momentum, and charge to changes in its energy. The second law says the surface area of a black hole never decreases on 
its own. Finally, the third law says that the surface gravity of a black hole is never zero. These laws are mathematical analogues of the laws of thermodynamics. They are not equivalent, however, because, according to general relativity without quantum mechanics, a black hole can never emit radiation, and thus its temperature must always be zero.20311204
Quantum mechanics predicts that a black hole will continuously emit thermal Hawking radiation, and therefore must always have a nonzero tempera
ture. It also predicts that all black holes have entropy which scales with their surface area. When quantum mechanics is accounted for, the laws of black hole mechanics become equivalent to the classical laws of thermodynamics.203205 However, these conclusions are derived without a complete theory of quantum gravity, although many potential theories do predict black holes having entropy and temperature. Thus, the true quantum nature of black hole thermodynamics continues to be debated.20329204
M
illions of black holes derived from stellar collapse are expected to exist in the Milky Way. Even a dwarf galaxy like Draco should have hundreds.206 Only a few of these have been detected.
By nature, black holes do not themselves emit any electromagnetic radiation other than the hypothetical, typically extremely weak Hawking radiation, so astrophysicists searching for black holes must rely on indirect observations. The defining characteristic of a black hole is its event horizon. The horizon its
elf cannot be imaged,207 so all other possible explanations for these indirect observations must be considered and eliminated before concluding that a black hole has been observed.20811
The Event Horizon Telescope (EHT) is a global system of radio telescopes capable of directly observing a black hole shadow.44 The angular resolution of a telescope is based on its aperture and the wavelengths it is observing. Because the angular diameters of Sagittarius A* and Messier 87* in the sky are very smal
l, a single telescope would need to be about the size of the Earth to clearly distinguish their horizons using radio wavelengths. By combining data from several different radio telescopes around the world, the Event Horizon Telescope creates an effective aperture the diameter size of the Earth. The EHT team used imaging algorithms to compute the most probable image from the data in its observations of Sagittarius A* and M87*.2091
Gravitational-wave interferometry can be used to detect merging bl
ack holes and other compact objects. In this method, a laser beam is split, sent down two long arms of a tunnel, then reflected at the far end of the tunnels to reconverge at the intersection of the arms, precisely cancelling each other. However, when a gravitational wave passes, it warps spacetime, changing the relative lengths of the arms themselves. Since each laser beam is now travelling a slightly different distance, they do not cancel out and produce a recognisable signal. Analysis of the 
signal can give scientists information about what caused the gravitational waves. Since gravitational waves are very weak, gravitational-wave observatories such as LIGO must have arms several kilometres long and carefully control for noise from Earth to be able to detect these gravitational waves.210 Since the first measurements in 2016, multiple gravitational waves from black holes have been detected and analysed.91
The proper motions of stars near the centre of the Milky Way provide strong obs
ervational evidence that these stars are orbiting a supermassive black hole. Astronomers have tracked the motions of over 100 stars orbiting an invisible object coincident with the radio source Sagittarius A*. One of the stars—called S2—completed a full orbit. By fitting the motions of stars to Keplerian orbits, the astronomers were able to infer that the invisible object assumed to be Sagittarius A* must have a mass of 4.3×106M☉, with a radius of less than 0.002 light-years.211 This upper limit
 radius is larger than the Schwarzschild radius for the estimated mass, so the combination does not prove Sagittarius A* is a black hole. Nevertheless, these observations strongly suggest that the central object is a supermassive black hole as there are no other plausible scenarios for confining so much invisible mass into such a small volume.39 Additionally, luminosity data from this object implies it must possess an event horizon, a defining feature of black holes.212 By tracking the motion of
 the centre it has been shown that the central object is motionless at the centre of the galaxy.213 The Event Horizon Telescope image of Sagittarius A*, released in 2022, provided further confirmation that it is indeed a black hole.45
X-ray binaries are binary systems that emit significant amounts of X-ray radiation. These X-ray emissions result when a compact object accretes matter from an ordinary star.214 The presence of an ordinary star in such a system provides an opportunity for studying t
he central object and to determine if it might be a black hole. By measuring the orbital period of the binary, the distance to the binary from Earth, and the mass of the companion star, scientists can estimate the mass of the compact object.215 The Tolman-Oppenheimer-Volkoff limit (TOV limit) dictates the largest mass a nonrotating neutron star can be, and is estimated to be about two solar masses. While a rotating neutron star can be slightly more massive, if the compact object is much more mas
sive than the TOV limit, it cannot be a neutron star and is generally expected to be a black hole.137216
X-ray binaries can be categorised as either low-mass or high-mass; this classification is based on the mass of the companion star, not the compact object itself.81 In a class of X-ray binaries called soft X-ray transients, the companion star is of relatively low mass, allowing for more accurate estimates of the black hole mass. These systems actively emit X-rays for only several months once e
very 10–50 years. During the period of low X-ray emission, called quiescence, the accretion disk is extremely faint, allowing detailed observation of the companion star.137 Numerous black hole candidates have been measured by this method.217 Black holes are also sometimes found in binaries with other compact objects, such as white dwarfs,81 neutron stars,218219 and other black holes.220221
The centre of nearly every large galaxy contains a supermassive black hole.86 The close observational corre
lation between the mass of this hole and the velocity dispersion of the host galaxy's bulge, known as the M–sigma relation, strongly suggests a connection between the formation of the black hole and that of the galaxy itself.222223 In some galaxies, the black hole forms a powerful source of radiation called an active galactic nucleus.22465
Astronomers use the term active galaxy to describe galaxies with unusual characteristics, such as unusual spectral line emission and very strong radio emissio
n. Theoretical and observational studies have shown that the high levels of activity in the centres of these galaxies, regions called active galactic nuclei (AGN), may be explained by accretion onto supermassive black holes. These AGN consist of a central black hole that may be millions or billions of times more massive than the Sun, a disk of interstellar gas and dust called an accretion disk, and two jets perpendicular to the accretion disk.226
The black holes in quiescent galaxies accrete mat
ter more slowly or radiate less efficiently.22465
Although supermassive black holes are expected to be found in most AGN, only some galaxies' nuclei have been more carefully studied in attempts to both identify and measure the actual masses of the central supermassive black hole candidates. Some of the most notable galaxies with supermassive black hole candidates include the Andromeda Galaxy, Messier 32, Messier 87, the Sombrero Galaxy, and the Milky Way itself.227228
Black holes can be detected
 by gravitational lensing: the deflection of light rays by the deformation of spacetime around a massive object.229 A distant star behind a source of gravity may produce multiple images of that star but if the images cannot be resolved, the phenomenon is called microlensing.230 In microlensing, astronomers see the star magnified by an amount which changes as the source star, lens, and observer move. Astronomers must monitor the star image over a few years and match its light curve to models of t
he gravitational effect.231 As a tool for astrophysics, microlensing is uniquely sensitive to dark objects like isolated black holes not paired in a binary object. However comparison of the predicted light curve to observations yields multiple indistinguishable solutions, requiring expensive follow-up measurements to select and confirm candidate black holes. Over 10,000 microlensing events yielded 23 black hole candidates but only one object has been confirmed as an isolated black hole using add
itional measurements from the Hubble Space Telescope.232
According to the no-hair theorem, a black hole is defined by only three parameters: its mass, charge, and angular momentum. This seems to mean that all other information about the matter that went into forming the black hole is lost, as there is no way to determine anything about the black hole from outside other than those three parameters. When black holes were thought to persist forever, this information loss was not problematic, as the
 information can be thought of as existing inside the black hole.233 However, black holes slowly evaporate by emitting Hawking radiation. This radiation does not appear to carry any additional information about the matter that formed the black hole, meaning that this information is seemingly gone forever. This is called the black hole information paradox.234235 Theoretical studies analysing the paradox have led to both further paradoxes and new ideas about the intersection of quantum mechanics a
nd general relativity. While there is no consensus on the resolution of the paradox, work on the problem is expected to be important for a theory of quantum gravity.236126
Observations of faraway galaxies have found that ultraluminous quasars, powered by supermassive black holes, existed in the early universe as far back as redshift
less than a billion years after the Big Bang.237 These black holes have been assumed to be the products of the gravitational collapse of large population III stars.2
38239 However, these stellar remnants were not massive enough to produce the quasars observed at early times without accreting beyond the Eddington limit, the theoretical maximum rate of black hole accretion.240241
Physicists have suggested a variety of different mechanisms by which these supermassive black holes may have formed. It has been proposed that smaller black holes may have also undergone mergers to produce the observed supermassive black holes.242243 It is also possible that they were
 seeded by direct-collapse black holes, in which a large cloud of hot gas avoids fragmentation that would lead to multiple stars, due to low angular momentum or heating from a nearby galaxy. Given the right circumstances, a single supermassive star forms and collapses directly into a black hole without undergoing typical stellar evolution.244245 Additionally, these supermassive black holes in the early universe may be high-mass primordial black holes, which could have accreted further matter in 
the centres of galaxies.246 Finally, certain mechanisms allow black holes to grow faster than the theoretical Eddington limit, such as dense gas in the accretion disk limiting outward radiation pressure that prevents the black hole from accreting.240247 However, the formation of bipolar jets prevent super-Eddington rates.195
While there is a strong case for supermassive black holes,248249 the dividing line between lighter black holes and neutron stars relies on theories of extremely dense matter
. Direct observational tests are not available: objects observed to have mass higher than the predictions for neutron stars are assumed to be black holes. Recent evidence from gravitational wave events suggests modifications of these theories may be needed.80 New exotic phases of matter could allow other kinds of massive objects.137 Quark stars would be made up of quark matter and supported by quark degeneracy pressure, a form of degeneracy pressure even stronger than neutron degeneracy pressure
. This would halt gravitational collapse at a higher mass than for a neutron star.250251 Even stronger stars called electroweak stars would convert quarks in their cores into leptons, providing additional pressure to stop the star from collapsing.252253 If, as some extensions of the Standard Model posit, quarks and leptons are made up of the even-smaller fundamental particles called preons, a very compact star could be supported by preon degeneracy pressure.254 While none of these hypothetical m
odels can explain all of the observations of stellar black hole candidates, a Q star is the only alternative which could significantly exceed the mass limit for neutron stars and thus provide an alternative for supermassive black holes.13712
A few theoretical objects have been conjectured to match observations of astronomical black hole candidates identically or near-identically, but which function via a different mechanism.255 A dark energy star would convert infalling matter into vacuum energy
; This vacuum energy would be much larger than the vacuum energy of outside space, exerting outwards pressure and preventing a singularity from forming.256257 A black star would be gravitationally collapsing slowly enough that quantum effects would keep it just on the cusp of fully collapsing into a black hole.258 A gravastar would consist of a very thin shell and a dark-energy interior providing outward pressure to stop the collapse into a black hole or formation of a singularity; It could even
 have another gravastar inside, called a 'nestar'.259
The concept of black holes have inspired artists as well as scientists.260 In her book Conjuring the Void: the Art of Black Holes, Lynn Gamwell used black holes as an example to explore how art and science interact, considering the application of art to create scientific visualizations and the impact of scientific ideas on art concepts like darkness.261 Some science fiction films have incorporated relativity into their black hole visualizatio
ns, leading to results similar to images derived from the Event Horizon Telescope.262115 Fictional treatments of black holes are also used as a mechanism for teaching science.263264
Black holes have been portrayed in science fiction in a variety of ways. Even before the advent of the term itself, objects with characteristics of black holes appeared in stories.265 In modern day, authors and screenwriters have exploited the relativistic effects of black holes, particularly gravitational time dilat
ion. Black holes have also been appropriated as wormholes or other methods of faster-than-light travel.266

Present-day climate change includes both global warming—the ongoing increase in global average temperature—and its wider effects on Earth's climate system. Climate change in a broader sense also includes previous long-term changes to Earth's climate. The modern-day rise in global temperatures is driven by human activities, especially fossil fuel (coal, oil and natural gas) burning since the Industrial Revolution.45 Fossil fuel use, deforestation, and some agricultural and industrial practices re
lease greenhouse gases.6 These gases absorb some of the heat that the Earth radiates after it warms from sunlight, warming the lower atmosphere. Earth's atmosphere now has roughly 50% more carbon dioxide, the main gas driving global warming, than it did at the end of the pre-industrial era, reaching levels not seen for millions of years.7
Climate change has an increasingly large impact on the environment. Heat waves and wildfires are becoming more common.8 Amplified warming in the Arctic has con
tributed to thawing permafrost, retreat of glaciers and sea ice decline.9 Higher temperatures are also causing more intense storms, droughts, and other weather extremes.10 Rapid environmental change in mountains, coral reefs, and the Arctic is forcing many species to relocate or become extinct.11 Even if efforts to minimize future warming are successful, some effects will continue for centuries. These include ocean heating, ocean acidification and sea level rise.12
Climate change threatens peopl
e with increased flooding, extreme heat, increased food and water scarcity, more disease, and economic loss.13 Human migration and conflict can also be a result.14 The World Health Organization calls climate change one of the biggest threats to global health in the 21st century.15 Societies and ecosystems will experience more severe risks without action to limit warming.16 Adapting to climate change through efforts like flood control measures or drought-resistant crops partially reduces climate 
change risks, although some limits to adaptation have already been reached.17 Poorer communities are responsible for a small share of global emissions, yet have the least ability to adapt and are most vulnerable to climate change.1819
Many climate change impacts have been observed in the first decades of the 21st century, with 2024 the warmest on record at +1.60°C (2.88°F) since regular tracking began in 1850.2122 Additional warming will increase these impacts and can trigger tipping points, suc
h as melting all of the Greenland ice sheet.23 Under the 2015 Paris Agreement, nations collectively agreed to keep warming "well under 2°C". However, with pledges made under the Agreement, global warming would still reach about 2.8°C (5.0°F) by the end of the century.24
There is widespread support for climate action worldwide,2526 and most countries aim to stop emitting carbon dioxide.27 Fossil fuels can be phased out by stopping subsidising them, conserving energy and switching to energy source
s that do not produce significant carbon pollution. These energy sources include wind, solar, hydro, and nuclear power.28 Cleanly generated electricity can replace fossil fuels for powering transportation, heating buildings, and running industrial processes.29 Carbon can also be removed from the atmosphere, for instance by increasing forest cover and farming with methods that store carbon in soil.303132
Before the 1980s, it was unclear whether the warming effect of increased greenhouse gases was
 stronger than the cooling effect of airborne particulates in air pollution. Scientists used the term inadvertent climate modification to refer to human impacts on the climate at this time.33 In the 1980s, the terms global warming and climate change became more common, often being used interchangeably.343536 Scientifically, global warming refers only to increased global average surface temperature, while climate change describes both global warming and its effects on Earth's climate system, such
 as precipitation changes.33
Climate change can also be used more broadly to include changes to the climate that have happened throughout Earth's history as result of natural processes.37 The term anthropogenic climate change is sometimes used to describe climate change resulting from human activities.38
Global warming—used as early as 197539—became the more popular term after NASA climate scientist James Hansen used it in his 1988 testimony in the U.S. Senate.40 Since the 2000s, usage of climat
e change has increased.41 Various scientists, politicians and media may use the terms climate crisis or climate emergency to talk about climate change, and may use the term global heating instead of global warming.4243
Over the last few million years the climate cycled through ice ages. One of the hotter periods was the Last Interglacial, around 125,000 years ago, where temperatures were between 0.5°C and 1.5°C warmer than before the start of global warming.46 This period saw sea levels 5 to 10 
metres higher than today. The most recent glacial maximum 20,000 years ago was some 5–7°C colder. This period has sea levels that were over 125 metres (410ft) lower than today.47
Temperatures stabilized in the current interglacial period beginning 11,700 years ago.48 This period also saw the start of agriculture.49 Historical patterns of warming and cooling, like the Medieval Warm Period and the Little Ice Age, did not occur at the same time across different regions. Temperatures may have reache
d as high as those of the late 20th century in a limited set of regions.5051 Climate information for that period comes from climate proxies, such as trees and ice cores.5253
Around 1850 thermometer records began to provide global coverage.56
Between the 18th century and 1970 there was little net warming, as the warming impact of greenhouse gas emissions was offset by cooling from sulfur dioxide emissions. Sulfur dioxide causes acid rain, but it also produces sulfate aerosols in the atmosphere, w
hich reflect sunlight and cause global dimming. After 1970, the increasing accumulation of greenhouse gases and controls on sulfur pollution led to a marked increase in temperature.5758
Ongoing changes in climate have had no precedent for several thousand years.59 Multiple datasets all show worldwide increases in surface temperature, at a rate of around 0.2°C per decade.60 The 2014–2023 decade warmed to an average 1.19°C  compared to the pre-industrial baseline (1850–1900).61 Not every single ye
ar was warmer than the last: internal climate variability processes can make any year 0.2°C warmer or colder than the average.62 From 1998 to 2013, negative phases of two such processes, Pacific Decadal Oscillation (PDO)63 and Atlantic Multidecadal Oscillation (AMO)64 caused a short slower period of warming called the "global warming hiatus".65 After the "hiatus", the opposite occurred, with 2024 well above the recent average at more than +1.5°C.66 This is why the temperature change is defined i
n terms of a 20-year average, which reduces the noise of hot and cold years and decadal climate patterns, and detects the long-term signal.67568
A wide range of other observations reinforce the evidence of warming.6970 The upper atmosphere is cooling, because greenhouse gases are trapping heat near the Earth's surface, and so less heat is radiating into space.71 Warming reduces average snow cover and forces the retreat of glaciers. At the same time, warming also causes greater evaporation from t
he oceans, leading to more atmospheric humidity, and more and heavier precipitation.7273 Plants are flowering earlier in spring, and thousands of animal species have been permanently moving to cooler areas.74
Different regions of the world warm at different rates. The pattern is independent of where greenhouse gases are emitted, because the gases persist long enough to diffuse across the planet. Since the pre-industrial period, the average surface temperature over land regions has increased almo
st twice as fast as the global average surface temperature.75 This is because oceans lose more heat by evaporation and oceans can store a lot of heat.76 The thermal energy in the global climate system has grown with only brief pauses since at least 1970, and over 90% of this extra energy has been stored in the ocean.7778 The rest has heated the atmosphere, melted ice, and warmed the continents.79
The Northern Hemisphere and the North Pole have warmed much faster than the South Pole and Southern 
Hemisphere. The Northern Hemisphere not only has much more land, but also more seasonal snow cover and sea ice. As these surfaces flip from reflecting a lot of light to being dark after the ice has melted, they start absorbing more heat.80 Local black carbon deposits on snow and ice also contribute to Arctic warming.81 Arctic surface temperatures are increasing between three and four times faster than in the rest of the world.8283 Melting of ice sheets near the poles weakens both the Atlantic an
d the Antarctic limb of thermohaline circulation, which further changes the distribution of heat and precipitation around the globe.84858687
The World Meteorological Organization estimates there is almost a 50% chance of the five-year average global temperature exceeding +1.5°C between 2024 and 2028.90 The IPCC expects the 20-year average to exceed +1.5°C in the early 2030s.91
The IPCC Sixth Assessment Report (2021) included projections that by 2100 global warming is very likely to reach 1.0–1.8
°C under a scenario with very low emissions of greenhouse gases, 2.1–3.5°C under an intermediate emissions scenario,
or 3.3–5.7°C under a very high emissions scenario.92 The warming will continue past 2100 in the intermediate and high emission scenarios,9394 with future projections of global surface temperatures by year 2300 being similar to millions of years ago.95
The remaining carbon budget for staying beneath certain temperature increases is determined by modelling the carbon cycle and clima
te sensitivity to greenhouse gases.96 According to UNEP, global warming can be kept below 2.0°C with a 50% chance if emissions after 2023 do not exceed 900 gigatonnes of CO2. This carbon budget corresponds to around 16 years of current emissions.97
The climate system experiences various cycles on its own which can last for years, decades or even centuries. For example, El Niño events cause short-term spikes in surface temperature while La Niña events cause short term cooling.98 Their relative fr
equency can affect global temperature trends on a decadal timescale.99 Other changes are caused by an imbalance of energy from external forcings.100 Examples of these include changes in the concentrations of greenhouse gases, solar luminosity, volcanic eruptions, and variations in the Earth's orbit around the Sun.101
To determine the human contribution to climate change, unique "fingerprints" for all potential causes are developed and compared with both observed patterns and known internal clima
te variability.102 For example, solar forcing—whose fingerprint involves warming the entire atmosphere—is ruled out because only the lower atmosphere has warmed.103 Atmospheric aerosols produce a smaller, cooling effect. Other drivers, such as changes in albedo, are less impactful.104
Greenhouse gases are transparent to sunlight, and thus allow it to pass through the atmosphere to heat the Earth's surface. The Earth radiates it as heat, and greenhouse gases absorb a portion of it. This absorptio
n slows the rate at which heat escapes into space, trapping heat near the Earth's surface and warming it over time.105
While water vapour (≈50%) and clouds (≈25%) are the biggest contributors to the greenhouse effect, they primarily change as a function of temperature and are therefore mostly considered to be feedbacks that change climate sensitivity. On the other hand, concentrations of gases such as CO2 (≈20%), tropospheric ozone,106 CFCs and nitrous oxide are added or removed independently fr
om temperature, and are therefore considered to be external forcings that change global temperatures.107
Before the Industrial Revolution, naturally occurring amounts of greenhouse gases caused the air near the surface to be about 33°C warmer than it would have been in their absence.108109 Human activity since the Industrial Revolution, mainly extracting and burning fossil fuels (coal, oil, and natural gas),110 has increased the amount of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. In 2022, the concentr
ations of CO2 and methane had increased by about 50% and 164%, respectively, since 1750.111 These CO2 levels are higher than they have been at any time during the last 14 million years.112 Concentrations of methane are far higher than they were over the last 800,000 years.113
Global human-caused greenhouse gas emissions in 2019 were equivalent to 59billion tonnes of CO2. Of these emissions, 75% was CO2, 18% was methane, 4% was nitrous oxide, and 2% was fluorinated gases.115 CO2 emissions primari
ly come from burning fossil fuels to provide energy for transport, manufacturing, heating, and electricity.6 Additional CO2 emissions come from deforestation and industrial processes, which include the CO2 released by the chemical reactions for making cement, steel, aluminium, and fertilizer.116117118119 Methane emissions come from livestock, manure, rice cultivation, landfills, wastewater, and coal mining, as well as oil and gas extraction.120121 Nitrous oxide emissions largely come from the mi
crobial decomposition of fertilizer.122123
While methane only lasts in the atmosphere for an average of 12 years,124 CO2 lasts much longer. The Earth's surface absorbs CO2 as part of the carbon cycle. While plants on land and in the ocean absorb most excess emissions of CO2 every year, that CO2 is returned to the atmosphere when biological matter is digested, burns, or decays.125 Land-surface carbon sink processes, such as carbon fixation in the soil and photosynthesis, remove about 29% of annua
l global CO2 emissions.126 The ocean has absorbed 20 to 30% of emitted CO2 over the last two decades.127 CO2 is only removed from the atmosphere for the long term when it is stored in the Earth's crust, which is a process that can take millions of years to complete.125
Around 30% of Earth's land area is largely unusable for humans (glaciers, deserts, etc.), 26% is forests, 10% is shrubland and 34% is agricultural land.129 Deforestation is the main land use change contributor to global warming,13
0 as the destroyed trees release CO2, and are not replaced by new trees, removing that carbon sink.131 Between 2001 and 2018, 27% of deforestation was from permanent clearing to enable agricultural expansion for crops and livestock. Another 24% has been lost to temporary clearing under the shifting cultivation agricultural systems. 26% was due to logging for wood and derived products, and wildfires have accounted for the remaining 23%.132 Some forests have not been fully cleared, but were alread
y degraded by these impacts. Restoring these forests also recovers their potential as a carbon sink.133
Local vegetation cover impacts how much of the sunlight gets reflected back into space (albedo), and how much heat is lost by evaporation. For instance, the change from a dark forest to grassland makes the surface lighter, causing it to reflect more sunlight. Deforestation can also modify the release of chemical compounds that influence clouds, and can change the roughness of Earth’s surface i
n a way affecting wind speed.134 In tropic and temperate areas the net effect is to produce significant warming, and forest restoration can make local temperatures cooler.133 At latitudes closer to the poles, there is a cooling effect as forest is replaced by snow-covered (and more reflective) plains.134 Globally, these increases in surface albedo have been the dominant direct influence on temperature from land use change. Thus, land use change to date is estimated to have a slight cooling effec
t.135
Air pollution, in the form of aerosols, affects the climate on a large scale.136 Aerosols scatter and absorb solar radiation. From 1961 to 1990, a gradual reduction in the amount of sunlight reaching the Earth's surface was observed. This phenomenon is popularly known as global dimming,137 and is primarily attributed to sulfate aerosols produced by the combustion of fossil fuels with heavy sulfur concentrations like coal and bunker fuel.58 Smaller contributions come from black carbon , and
 from dust.138139140 Globally, aerosols have been declining since 1990 due to pollution controls, meaning that they no longer mask greenhouse gas warming as much.14158
Aerosols also have indirect effects on the Earth's energy budget. Sulfate aerosols act as cloud condensation nuclei and lead to clouds that have more and smaller cloud droplets. These clouds reflect solar radiation more efficiently than clouds with fewer and larger droplets.142 They also reduce the growth of raindrops, which makes
 clouds more reflective to incoming sunlight.143 Indirect effects of aerosols are the largest uncertainty in radiative forcing.144
While aerosols typically limit global warming by reflecting sunlight, black carbon in soot that falls on snow or ice can contribute to global warming. The resulting excess heat accelerates the melting of ice sheets and glaciers, which in turn contributes significantly to global sea-level rise.14514681 Limiting new black carbon deposits in the Arctic could reduce glob
al warming by 0.2°C by 2050.147 The effect of decreasing sulfur content of fuel oil for ships since 2020148 is estimated to cause an additional 0.05°C increase in global mean temperature by 2050.149
As the Sun is the Earth's primary energy source, changes in incoming sunlight directly affect the climate system.144 Solar irradiance has been measured directly by satellites,152 and indirect measurements are available from the early 1600s onwards.144 Since 1880, there has been no upward trend in the
 amount of the Sun's energy reaching the Earth, in contrast to the warming of the lower atmosphere (the troposphere).153 The upper atmosphere (the stratosphere) would also be warming if the Sun was sending more energy to Earth, but instead, it has been cooling.103
This is consistent with greenhouse gases preventing heat from leaving the Earth's atmosphere.154
Explosive volcanic eruptions can release gases, dust and ash that partially block sunlight and reduce temperatures, or they can send water
 vapour into the atmosphere, which adds to greenhouse gases and increases temperatures. These impacts on temperature only last for several years, because both water vapour and volcanic material have low persistence in the atmosphere.155 Volcanic CO2 emissions are more persistent, but they are equivalent to less than 1% of current human-caused CO2 emissions.156 Volcanic activity still represents the single largest natural impact (forcing) on temperature in the industrial era. Yet, like the other 
natural forcings, it has had negligible impacts on global temperature trends since the Industrial Revolution.155
The climate system's response to an initial forcing is shaped by feedbacks, which either amplify or dampen the change. Self-reinforcing or positive feedbacks increase the response, while balancing or negative feedbacks reduce it.158 The main reinforcing feedbacks are the water-vapour feedback, the ice–albedo feedback, and the net cloud feedback.159160 The primary balancing mechanism i
s radiative cooling, as Earth's surface gives off more heat to space in response to rising temperature.161 In addition to temperature feedbacks, there are feedbacks in the carbon cycle, such as the fertilizing effect of CO2 on plant growth.162 Feedbacks are expected to trend in a positive direction as greenhouse gas emissions continue, raising climate sensitivity.163
These feedback processes alter the pace of global warming. For instance, warmer air can hold more moisture in the form of water va
pour, which is itself a potent greenhouse gas.159 Warmer air can also make clouds higher and thinner, and therefore more insulating, increasing climate warming.164 The reduction of snow cover and sea ice in the Arctic is another major feedback, this reduces the reflectivity of the Earth's surface in the region and accelerates Arctic warming.165166 This additional warming also contributes to permafrost thawing, which releases methane and CO2 into the atmosphere.167
Around half of human-caused CO2
 emissions have been absorbed by land plants and by the oceans.168 This fraction is not static and if future CO2 emissions decrease, the Earth will be able to absorb up to around 70%. If they increase substantially, it'll still absorb more carbon than now, but the overall fraction will decrease to below 40%.169 This is because climate change increases droughts and heat waves that eventually inhibit plant growth on land, and soils will release more carbon from dead plants when they are warmer.170
171 The rate at which oceans absorb atmospheric carbon will be lowered as they become more acidic and experience changes in thermohaline circulation and phytoplankton distribution.17217385 Uncertainty over feedbacks, particularly cloud cover,174 is the major reason why different climate models project different magnitudes of warming for a given amount of emissions.175
A climate model is a representation of the physical, chemical and biological processes that affect the climate system.176 Models 
include natural processes like changes in the Earth's orbit, historical changes in the Sun's activity, and volcanic forcing.177 Models are used to estimate the degree of warming future emissions will cause when accounting for the strength of climate feedbacks.178179 Models also predict the circulation of the oceans, the annual cycle of the seasons, and the flows of carbon between the land surface and the atmosphere.180
The physical realism of models is tested by examining their ability to simula
te current or past climates.181 Past models have underestimated the rate of Arctic shrinkage182 and underestimated the rate of precipitation increase.183 Sea level rise since 1990 was underestimated in older models, but more recent models agree well with observations.184 The 2017 United States-published National Climate Assessment notes that "climate models may still be underestimating or missing relevant feedback processes".185 Additionally, climate models may be unable to adequately predict sh
ort-term regional climatic shifts.186
A subset of climate models add societal factors to a physical climate model. These models simulate how population, economic growth, and energy use affect—and interact with—the physical climate. With this information, these models can produce scenarios of future greenhouse gas emissions. This is then used as input for physical climate models and carbon cycle models to predict how atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases might change.187188 Depending on 
the socioeconomic scenario and the mitigation scenario, models produce atmospheric CO2 concentrations that range widely between 380 and 1400 ppm.189
The environmental effects of climate change are broad and far-reaching, affecting oceans, ice, and weather. Changes may occur gradually or rapidly. Evidence for these effects comes from studying climate change in the past, from modelling, and from modern observations.191 Since the 1950s, droughts and heat waves have appeared simultaneously with incr
easing frequency.192 Extremely wet or dry events within the monsoon period have increased in India and East Asia.193 Monsoonal precipitation over the Northern Hemisphere has increased since 1980.194 The rainfall rate and intensity of hurricanes and typhoons is likely increasing,195 and the geographic range likely expanding poleward in response to climate warming.196 The frequency of tropical cyclones has not increased as a result of climate change.197
Global sea level is rising as a consequence 
of thermal expansion and the melting of glaciers and ice sheets. Sea level rise has increased over time, reaching 4.8cm per decade between 2014 and 2023.199 Over the 21st century, the IPCC projects 32–62cm of sea level rise under a low emission scenario, 44–76cm under an intermediate one and 65–101cm under a very high emission scenario.200 Marine ice sheet instability processes in Antarctica may add substantially to these values,201 including the possibility of a 2-meter sea level rise by 2100 u
nder high emissions.202
Climate change has led to decades of shrinking and thinning of the Arctic sea ice.203 While ice-free summers are expected to be rare at 1.5°C degrees of warming, they are set to occur once every three to ten years at a warming level of 2°C.204 Higher atmospheric CO2 concentrations cause more CO2 to dissolve in the oceans, which is making them more acidic.205 Because oxygen is less soluble in warmer water,206 its concentrations in the ocean are decreasing, and dead zones a
re expanding.207
Greater degrees of global warming increase the risk of passing through 'tipping points'—thresholds beyond which certain major impacts can no longer be avoided even if temperatures return to their previous state.210211 For instance, the Greenland ice sheet is already melting, but if global warming reaches levels between 1.7°C and 2.3°C, its melting will continue until it fully disappears. If the warming is later reduced to 1.5°C or less, it will still lose a lot more ice than if 
the warming was never allowed to reach the threshold in the first place.212 While the ice sheets would melt over millennia, other tipping points would occur faster and give societies less time to respond. The collapse of major ocean currents like the Atlantic meridional overturning circulation (AMOC), and irreversible damage to key ecosystems like the Amazon rainforest and coral reefs can unfold in a matter of decades.209 The collapse of the AMOC would be a severe climate catastrophe, resulting 
in a cooling of the Northern Hemisphere.213
The long-term effects of climate change on oceans include further ice melt, ocean warming, sea level rise, ocean acidification and ocean deoxygenation.214 The timescale of long-term impacts are centuries to millennia due to CO2's long atmospheric lifetime.215 The result is an estimated total sea level rise of 2.3 metres per degree Celsius (4.2ft/°F) after 2000 years.216 Oceanic CO2 uptake is slow enough that ocean acidification will also continue for h
undreds to thousands of years.217 Deep oceans (below 2,000 metres (6,600ft)) are also already committed to losing over 10% of their dissolved oxygen by the warming which occurred to date.218 Further, the West Antarctic ice sheet appears committed to practically irreversible melting, which would increase the sea levels by at least 3.3m (10ft 10in) over approximately 2000 years.209219220
Recent warming has driven many terrestrial and freshwater species poleward and towards higher altitudes.221 For
 instance, the range of hundreds of North American birds has shifted northward at an average rate of 1.5km/year over the past 55 years.222 Higher atmospheric CO2 levels and an extended growing season have resulted in global greening. However, heatwaves and drought have reduced ecosystem productivity in some regions. The future balance of these opposing effects is unclear.223 A related phenomenon driven by climate change is woody plant encroachment, affecting up to 500 million hectares globally.2
24 Climate change has contributed to the expansion of drier climate zones, such as the expansion of deserts in the subtropics.225 The size and speed of global warming is making abrupt changes in ecosystems more likely.226 Overall, it is expected that climate change will result in the extinction of many species.227
The oceans have heated more slowly than the land, but plants and animals in the ocean have migrated towards the colder poles faster than species on land.228 Just as on land, heat waves
 in the ocean occur more frequently due to climate change, harming a wide range of organisms such as corals, kelp, and seabirds.229 Ocean acidification makes it harder for marine calcifying organisms such as mussels, barnacles and corals to produce shells and skeletons; and heatwaves have bleached coral reefs.230 Harmful algal blooms enhanced by climate change and eutrophication lower oxygen levels, disrupt food webs and cause great loss of marine life.231 Coastal ecosystems are under particular
 stress. Almost half of global wetlands have disappeared due to climate change and other human impacts.232 Plants have come under increased stress from damage by insects.233
The effects of climate change are impacting humans everywhere in the world.239 Impacts can be observed on all continents and ocean regions,240 with low-latitude, less developed areas facing the greatest risk.241 Continued warming has potentially "severe, pervasive and irreversible impacts" for people and ecosystems.242 The r
isks are unevenly distributed, but are generally greater for disadvantaged people in developing and developed countries.243
The World Health Organization calls climate change one of the biggest threats to global health in the 21st century.15 Scientists have warned about the irreversible harms it poses.244 Extreme weather events affect public health, and food and water security.245246247 Temperature extremes lead to increased illness and death.245246 Climate change increases the intensity and fre
quency of extreme weather events.246247 It can affect transmission of infectious diseases, such as dengue fever and malaria.244245 According to the World Economic Forum, 14.5million more deaths are expected due to climate change by 2050.248 30% of the global population currently live in areas where extreme heat and humidity are already associated with excess deaths.249250 By 2100, 50% to 75% of the global population would live in such areas.249251
While total crop yields have been increasing in 
the past 50 years due to agricultural improvements, climate change has already decreased the rate of yield growth.247 Fisheries have been negatively affected in multiple regions.247 While agricultural productivity has been positively affected in some high latitude areas, mid- and low-latitude areas have been negatively affected.247 Climate change affects land suitability for many crops, with suitable areas for given crops usually moving to higher latitudes and altitudes.252 According to the Worl
d Economic Forum, an increase in drought in certain regions could cause 3.2million deaths from malnutrition by 2050 and stunting in children.253 With 2°C warming, global livestock headcounts could decline by 7–10% by 2050, as less animal feed will be available.254 If the emissions continue to increase for the rest of century, then over 9 million climate-related deaths would occur annually by 2100.255
Economic damages due to climate change may be severe and there is a chance of disastrous consequ
ences.256 Severe impacts are expected in South-East Asia and sub-Saharan Africa, where most of the local inhabitants are dependent upon natural and agricultural resources.257258 Heat stress can prevent outdoor labourers from working. If warming reaches 4°C then labour capacity in those regions could be reduced by 30 to 50%.259 The World Bank estimates that between 2016 and 2030, climate change could drive over 120 million people into extreme poverty without adaptation.260
Inequalities based on w
ealth and social status have worsened due to climate change.261 Major difficulties in mitigating, adapting to, and recovering from climate shocks are faced by marginalized people who have less control over resources.262257 Indigenous people, who are subsistent on their land and ecosystems, will face endangerment to their wellness and lifestyles due to climate change.263 An expert elicitation concluded that the role of climate change in armed conflict has been small compared to factors such as so
cio-economic inequality and state capabilities.264
While women are not inherently more at risk from climate change and shocks, limits on women's resources and discriminatory gender norms constrain their adaptive capacity and resilience.265 For example, women's work burdens, including hours worked in agriculture, tend to decline less than men's during climate shocks such as heat stress.265
Climate change threatens the sports economy by disrupting seasons, damaging infrastructure and reducing fan 
engagement, with the most immediate risks seen in football, winter sports and outdoor events.266
Low-lying islands and coastal communities are threatened by sea level rise, which makes urban flooding more common. Sometimes, land is permanently lost to the sea.267 This could lead to statelessness for people in island nations, such as the Maldives and Tuvalu.268 In some regions, the rise in temperature and humidity may be too severe for humans to adapt to.269 With worst-case climate change, models
 project that areas almost one-third of humanity live in might become Sahara-like uninhabitable and extremely hot climates.270
These factors can drive climate or environmental migration, within and between countries.271 More people are expected to be displaced because of sea level rise, extreme weather and conflict from increased competition over natural resources. Climate change may also increase vulnerability, leading to "trapped populations" who are not able to move due to a lack of resources
.272
Climate change can be mitigated by reducing the rate at which greenhouse gases are emitted into the atmosphere, and by increasing the rate at which carbon dioxide is removed from the atmosphere.278 To limit global warming to less than 2°C global greenhouse gas emissions need to be net-zero by 2070.279 This requires far-reaching, systemic changes on an unprecedented scale in energy, land, cities, transport, buildings, and industry.280
The United Nations Environment Programme estimates that c
ountries need to triple their pledges under the Paris Agreement within the next decade to limit global warming to 2°C.281 With pledges made under the Paris Agreement as of 2024, there would be a 66% chance that global warming is kept under 2.8°C by the end of the century . When only considering current policies, this raises to 3.1°C.282 Globally, limiting warming to 2°C may result in higher economic benefits than economic costs.283
Although there is no single pathway to limit global warming to 2
°C,284 most scenarios and strategies see a major increase in the use of renewable energy in combination with increased energy efficiency measures to generate the needed greenhouse gas reductions.285 To reduce pressures on ecosystems and enhance their carbon sequestration capabilities, changes would also be necessary in agriculture and forestry,286 such as preventing deforestation and restoring natural ecosystems by reforestation.287
Other approaches to mitigating climate change have a higher lev
el of risk. Scenarios that limit global warming to 1.5°C typically project the large-scale use of carbon dioxide removal methods over the 21st century.288 There are concerns, though, about over-reliance on these technologies, and environmental impacts.289
Solar radiation modification (SRM) is a proposal for reducing global warming by reflecting some sunlight away from Earth and back into space. Because it does not reduce greenhouse gas concentrations, it would not address ocean acidification290 
and is not considered mitigation.291 SRM should be considered only as a supplement to mitigation, not a replacement for it,292 due to risks such as rapid warming if it were abruptly stopped and not restarted.293 The most-studied approach is stratospheric aerosol injection.294 SRM could reduce global warming and some of its impacts, though imperfectly.295 It poses environmental risks, such as changes to rainfall patterns,296 as well as political challenges, such as who would decide whether to use
 it.294
Renewable energy is key to limiting climate change.299 For decades, fossil fuels have accounted for roughly 80% of the world's energy use.300 The remaining share has been split between nuclear power and renewables .301 Fossil fuel use is expected to peak in absolute terms prior to 2030 and then to decline, with coal use experiencing the sharpest reductions.302 Renewables represented 86% of all new electricity generation installed in 2023.303 Other forms of clean energy, such as nuclear a
nd hydropower, currently have a larger share of the energy supply. However, their future growth forecasts appear limited in comparison.304
While solar panels and onshore wind are now among the cheapest forms of adding new power generation capacity in many locations,305 green energy policies are needed to achieve a rapid transition from fossil fuels to renewables.306 To achieve carbon neutrality by 2050, renewable energy would become the dominant form of electricity generation, rising to 85% or m
ore by 2050 in some scenarios. Investment in coal would be eliminated and coal use nearly phased out by 2050.307308
Electricity generated from renewable sources would also need to become the main energy source for heating and transport.309 Transport can switch away from internal combustion engine vehicles and towards electric vehicles, public transit, and active transport (cycling and walking).310311 For shipping and flying, low-carbon fuels would reduce emissions.310 Heating could be increasing
ly decarbonized with technologies like heat pumps.312
There are obstacles to the continued rapid growth of clean energy, including renewables.313 Wind and solar produce energy intermittently and with seasonal variability. Traditionally, hydro dams with reservoirs and fossil fuel power plants have been used when variable energy production is low. Going forward, battery storage can be expanded, energy demand and supply can be matched, and long-distance transmission can smooth variability of renewa
ble outputs.299 Bioenergy is often not carbon-neutral and may have negative consequences for food security.314 The growth of nuclear power is constrained by controversy around radioactive waste, nuclear weapon proliferation, and accidents.315316 Hydropower growth is limited by the fact that the best sites have been developed, and new projects are confronting increased social and environmental concerns.317
Low-carbon energy improves human health by minimizing climate change as well as reducing ai
r pollution deaths,318 which were estimated at 7 million annually in 2016.319 Meeting the Paris Agreement goals that limit warming to a 2°C increase could save about a million of those lives per year by 2050, whereas limiting global warming to 1.5°C could save millions and simultaneously increase energy security and reduce poverty.320 Improving air quality also has economic benefits which may be larger than mitigation costs.321
Reducing energy demand is another major aspect of reducing emissions
.322 If less energy is needed, there is more flexibility for clean energy development. It also makes it easier to manage the electricity grid, and minimizes carbon-intensive infrastructure development.323 Major increases in energy efficiency investment will be required to achieve climate goals, comparable to the level of investment in renewable energy.324 Several COVID-19 related changes in energy use patterns, energy efficiency investments, and funding have made forecasts for this decade more d
ifficult and uncertain.325
Strategies to reduce energy demand vary by sector. In the transport sector, passengers and freight can switch to more efficient travel modes, such as buses and trains, or use electric vehicles.326 Industrial strategies to reduce energy demand include improving heating systems and motors, designing less energy-intensive products, and increasing product lifetimes.327 In the building sector the focus is on better design of new buildings, and higher levels of energy effici
ency in retrofitting.328 The use of technologies like heat pumps can also increase building energy efficiency.329
Agriculture and forestry face a triple challenge of limiting greenhouse gas emissions, preventing the further conversion of forests to agricultural land, and meeting increases in world food demand.330 A set of actions could reduce agriculture and forestry-based emissions by two-thirds from 2010 levels. These include reducing growth in demand for food and other agricultural products, 
increasing land productivity, protecting and restoring forests, and reducing greenhouse gas emissions from agricultural production.331
On the demand side, a key component of reducing emissions is shifting people towards plant-based diets.332 Eliminating the production of livestock for meat and dairy would eliminate about three-quarters of all emissions from agriculture and other land use.333 Livestock also occupy 37% of ice-free land area on Earth and consume feed from the 12% of land area used 
for crops, driving deforestation and land degradation.334
Steel and cement production are responsible for about 13% of industrial CO2 emissions. In these industries, carbon-intensive materials such as coke and lime play an integral role in the production, so that reducing CO2 emissions requires research into alternative chemistries.335 Where energy production or CO2-intensive heavy industries continue to produce waste CO2, technology can sometimes be used to capture and store most of the gas ins
tead of releasing it to the atmosphere.336 This technology, carbon capture and storage (CCS), could have a critical but limited role in reducing emissions.336 It is relatively expensive337 and has been deployed only to an extent that removes around 0.1% of annual greenhouse gas emissions.336
Natural carbon sinks can be enhanced to sequester significantly larger amounts of CO2 beyond naturally occurring levels.338 Reforestation and afforestation  are among the most mature sequestration techniques
, although the latter raises food security concerns.339 Farmers can promote sequestration of carbon in soils through practices such as use of winter cover crops, reducing the intensity and frequency of tillage, and using compost and manure as soil amendments.340 Forest and landscape restoration yields many benefits for the climate, including greenhouse gas emissions sequestration and reduction.133 Restoration/recreation of coastal wetlands, prairie plots and seagrass meadows increases the uptake
 of carbon into organic matter.341342 When carbon is sequestered in soils and in organic matter such as trees, there is a risk of the carbon being re-released into the atmosphere later through changes in land use, fire, or other changes in ecosystems.343
The use of bioenergy in conjunction with carbon capture and storage (BECCS) can result in net negative emissions as CO2 is drawn from the atmosphere.344 It remains highly uncertain whether carbon dioxide removal techniques will be able to play a
 large role in limiting warming to 1.5°C. Policy decisions that rely on carbon dioxide removal increase the risk of global warming rising beyond international goals.345
Adaptation is "the process of adjustment to current or expected changes in climate and its effects".3465 Without additional mitigation, adaptation cannot avert the risk of "severe, widespread and irreversible" impacts.347 More severe climate change requires more transformative adaptation, which can be prohibitively expensive.348 
The capacity and potential for humans to adapt is unevenly distributed across different regions and populations, and developing countries generally have less.349 The first two decades of the 21st century saw an increase in adaptive capacity in most low- and middle-income countries with improved access to basic sanitation and electricity, but progress is slow. Many countries have implemented adaptation policies. However, there is a considerable gap between necessary and available finance.350
Adap
tation to sea level rise consists of avoiding at-risk areas, learning to live with increased flooding, and building flood controls. If that fails, managed retreat may be needed.351 There are economic barriers for tackling dangerous heat impact. Avoiding strenuous work or having air conditioning is not possible for everybody.352 In agriculture, adaptation options include a switch to more sustainable diets, diversification, erosion control, and genetic improvements for increased tolerance to a cha
nging climate.353 Insurance allows for risk-sharing, but is often difficult to get for people on lower incomes.354 Education, migration and early warning systems can reduce climate vulnerability.355 Planting mangroves or encouraging other coastal vegetation can buffer storms.356357
Ecosystems adapt to climate change, a process that can be supported by human intervention. By increasing connectivity between ecosystems, species can migrate to more favourable climate conditions. Species can also be 
introduced to areas acquiring a favourable climate. Protection and restoration of natural and semi-natural areas helps build resilience, making it easier for ecosystems to adapt. Many of the actions that promote adaptation in ecosystems, also help humans adapt via ecosystem-based adaptation. For instance, restoration of natural fire regimes makes catastrophic fires less likely, and reduces human exposure. Giving rivers more space allows for more water storage in the natural system, reducing floo
d risk. Restored forest acts as a carbon sink, but planting trees in unsuitable regions can exacerbate climate impacts.358
There are synergies but also trade-offs between adaptation and mitigation.359 An example for synergy is increased food productivity, which has large benefits for both adaptation and mitigation.360 An example of a trade-off is that increased use of air conditioning allows people to better cope with heat, but increases energy demand. Another trade-off example is that more comp
act urban development may reduce emissions from transport and construction, but may also increase the urban heat island effect, exposing people to heat-related health risks.361
Countries that are most vulnerable to climate change have typically been responsible for a small share of global emissions. This raises questions about justice and fairness.362 Limiting global warming makes it much easier to achieve the UN's Sustainable Development Goals, such as eradicating poverty and reducing inequalit
ies. The connection is recognized in Sustainable Development Goal 13 which is to "take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts".363 The goals on food, clean water and ecosystem protection have synergies with climate mitigation.364
The geopolitics of climate change is complex. It has often been framed as a free-rider problem, in which all countries benefit from mitigation done by other countries, but individual countries would lose from switching to a low-carbon economy themselves.
 Sometimes mitigation also has localized benefits though. For instance, the benefits of a coal phase-out to public health and local environments exceed the costs in almost all regions.365 Furthermore, net importers of fossil fuels win economically from switching to clean energy, causing net exporters to face stranded assets: fossil fuels they cannot sell.366
A wide range of policies, regulations, and laws are being used to reduce emissions. As of 2019, carbon pricing covers about 20% of global g
reenhouse gas emissions.367 Carbon can be priced with carbon taxes and emissions trading systems.368 Direct global fossil fuel subsidies reached $319billion in 2017, and $5.2trillion when indirect costs such as air pollution are priced in.369 Ending these can cause a 28% reduction in global carbon emissions and a 46% reduction in air pollution deaths.370 Money saved on fossil subsidies could be used to support the transition to clean energy instead.371 More direct methods to reduce greenhouse ga
ses include vehicle efficiency standards, renewable fuel standards, and air pollution regulations on heavy industry.372 Several countries require utilities to increase the share of renewables in power production.373 An Open Coalition on Compliance Carbon Markets with the aim of creating a global cap and trade system was established at COP30 (2025). According to some calculations it can increase emissions reduction seven-fold over current policies, deliver $200 billion per year for clean-energy a
nd social programs and even close the gap between current emissions trajectory and the goals of the Paris agreement.374375376
Policy designed through the lens of climate justice tries to address human rights issues and social inequality. According to proponents of climate justice, the costs of climate adaptation should be paid by those most responsible for climate change, while the beneficiaries of payments should be those suffering impacts. One way this can be addressed in practice is to have w
ealthy nations pay poorer countries to adapt.377
Oxfam found that in 2023 the wealthiest 10% of people were responsible for 50% of global emissions, while the bottom 50% were responsible for just 8%.378 Production of emissions is another way to look at responsibility: under that approach, the top 21 fossil fuel companies would owe cumulative climate reparations of $5.4trillion over the period 2025–2050.379 To achieve a just transition, people working in the fossil fuel sector would also need oth
er jobs, and their communities would need investments.380
Nearly all countries in the world are parties to the 1994 United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC).384 The goal of the UNFCCC is to prevent dangerous human interference with the climate system.385 As stated in the convention, this requires that greenhouse gas concentrations are stabilized in the atmosphere at a level where ecosystems can adapt naturally to climate change, food production is not threatened, and econom
ic development can be sustained.386 The UNFCCC does not itself restrict emissions but rather provides a framework for protocols that do. Global emissions have risen since the UNFCCC was signed.387 Its yearly conferences are the stage of global negotiations.388
The 1997 Kyoto Protocol extended the UNFCCC and included legally binding commitments for most developed countries to limit their emissions.389 During the negotiations, the G77 (representing developing countries) pushed for a mandate requir
ing developed countries to " the lead" in reducing their emissions,390 since developed countries contributed most to the accumulation of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. Per-capita emissions were also still relatively low in developing countries and developing countries would need to emit more to meet their development needs.391
The 2009 Copenhagen Accord has been widely portrayed as disappointing because of its low goals, and was rejected by poorer nations including the G77.392 Associated pa
rties aimed to limit the global temperature rise to below 2°C.393 The accord set the goal of sending $100billion per year to developing countries for mitigation and adaptation by 2020, and proposed the founding of the Green Climate Fund.394 As of 2020update, only $83.3billion were delivered. Only in 2023 the target is expected to be achieved.395
In 2015 all UN countries negotiated the Paris Agreement, which aims to keep global warming well below 2.0°C and contains an aspirational goal of keeping
 warming under 1.5°C.396 The agreement replaced the Kyoto Protocol. Unlike Kyoto, no binding emission targets were set in the Paris Agreement. Instead, a set of procedures was made binding. Countries have to regularly set ever more ambitious goals and reevaluate these goals every five years.397 The Paris Agreement restated that developing countries must be financially supported.398 As of March 2025update, 194 states and the European Union have acceded to or ratified the agreement.399
The 1987 Mo
ntreal Protocol, an international agreement to phase out production of ozone-depleting gases, has had benefits for climate change mitigation.400 Several ozone-depleting gases like chlorofluorocarbons are powerful greenhouse gases, so banning their production and usage may have avoided a temperature rise of 0.5°C–1.0°C,401 as well as additional warming by preventing damage to vegetation from ultraviolet radiation.402 It is estimated that the agreement has been more effective at curbing greenhouse
 gas emissions than the Kyoto Protocol specifically designed to do so.403 The most recent amendment to the Montreal Protocol, the 2016 Kigali Amendment, committed to reducing the emissions of hydrofluorocarbons, which served as a replacement for banned ozone-depleting gases and are also potent greenhouse gases.404 Should countries comply with the amendment, a warming of 0.3°C–0.5°C is estimated to be avoided.405
In 2019, the United Kingdom parliament became the first national government to decla
re a climate emergency.407 Other countries and jurisdictions followed suit.408 That same year, the European Parliament declared a "climate and environmental emergency".409 The European Commission presented its European Green Deal with the goal of making the EU carbon-neutral by 2050.410 In 2021, the European Commission released its "Fit for 55" legislation package, which contains guidelines for the car industry; all new cars on the European market must be zero-emission vehicles from 2035.411
Maj
or countries in Asia have made similar pledges: South Korea and Japan have committed to become carbon-neutral by 2050, and China by 2060.412 While India has strong incentives for renewables, it also plans a significant expansion of coal in the country.413 Vietnam is among very few coal-dependent, fast-developing countries that pledged to phase out unabated coal power by the 2040s or as soon as possible thereafter.414
As of 2021, based on information from 48 national climate plans, which represen
t 40% of the parties to the Paris Agreement, estimated total greenhouse gas emissions will be 0.5% lower compared to 2010 levels, below the 45% or 25% reduction goals to limit global warming to 1.5°C or 2°C, respectively.415
Public debate about climate change has been strongly affected by climate change denial and misinformation, which first emerged in the United States and has since spread to other countries, particularly Canada and Australia. It originated from fossil fuel companies, industry 
groups, conservative think tanks, and contrarian scientists.417 Like the tobacco industry, the main strategy of these groups has been to manufacture doubt about climate-change related scientific data and results.418 People who hold unwarranted doubt about climate change are sometimes called climate change "skeptics", although "contrarians" or "deniers" are more appropriate terms.419
There are different variants of climate denial: some deny that warming takes place at all, some acknowledge warmin
g but attribute it to natural influences, and some minimize the negative impacts of climate change.420 Manufacturing uncertainty about the science later developed into a manufactured controversy: creating the belief that there is significant uncertainty about climate change within the scientific community to delay policy changes.421 Strategies to promote these ideas include criticism of scientific institutions,422 and questioning the motives of individual scientists.420 An echo chamber of climat
e-denying blogs and media has further fomented misunderstanding of climate change.423
Climate change came to international public attention in the late 1980s.427 Due to media coverage in the early 1990s, people often confused climate change with other environmental issues like ozone depletion.428 In popular culture, the climate fiction movie The Day After Tomorrow (2004) and the Al Gore documentary An Inconvenient Truth (2006) focused on climate change.427
Significant regional, gender, age and p
olitical differences exist in both public concern for, and understanding of, climate change. More highly educated people, and in some countries, women and younger people, were more likely to see climate change as a serious threat.429 College biology textbooks from the 2010s featured less content on climate change compared to those from the preceding decade, with decreasing emphasis on solutions.430 Partisan gaps also exist in many countries,431 and countries with high CO2 emissions tend to be le
ss concerned.432 Views on causes of climate change vary widely between countries.433 Media coverage linked to protests has had impacts on public sentiment as well as on which aspects of climate change are focused upon.434 Higher levels of worry are associated with stronger public support for policies that address climate change.435 Concern has increased over time,436 and in 2021 a majority of citizens in 30 countries expressed a high level of worry about climate change, or view it as a global em
ergency.437 A 2024 survey across 125 countries found that 89% of the global population demanded intensified political action, but systematically underestimated other peoples' willingness to act.2526
Climate protests demand that political leaders take action to prevent climate change. They can take the form of public demonstrations, fossil fuel divestment, lawsuits and other activities.438439 Prominent demonstrations include the School Strike for Climate. In this initiative, young people across t
he globe have been protesting since 2018 by skipping school on Fridays, inspired by Swedish activist and then-teenager Greta Thunberg.440 Mass civil disobedience actions by groups like Extinction Rebellion have protested by disrupting roads and public transport.441
Litigation is increasingly used as a tool to strengthen climate action from public institutions and companies. Activists also initiate lawsuits which target governments and demand that they take ambitious action or enforce existing la
ws on climate change.442 Lawsuits against fossil-fuel companies generally seek compensation for loss and damage.443 On 23 July 2025, the UN's International Court of Justice issued its advisory opinion, saying explicitly that states must act to stop climate change, and if they fail to accomplish that duty, other states can sue them. This obligation includes implementing their commitments in international agreements they are parties to, such as the 2015 Paris Climate Accord.444445446
Scientists in
 the 19th century such as Alexander von Humboldt began to foresee the effects of climate change.448449450451 In the 1820s, Joseph Fourier proposed the greenhouse effect to explain why Earth's temperature was higher than the Sun's energy alone could explain. Earth's atmosphere is transparent to sunlight, so sunlight reaches the surface where it is converted to heat. However, the atmosphere is not transparent to heat radiating from the surface, and captures some of that heat, which in turn warms t
he planet.452
In 1856 Eunice Newton Foote demonstrated that the warming effect of the Sun is greater for air with water vapour than for dry air, and that the effect is even greater with carbon dioxide (CO2). In "Circumstances Affecting the Heat of the Sun's Rays" she concluded that "n atmosphere of that gas would give to our earth a high temperature".453454
Starting in 1859,456 John Tyndall established that nitrogen and oxygen—together totalling 99% of dry air—are transparent to radiated heat. H
owever, water vapour and gases such as methane and carbon dioxide absorb radiated heat and re-radiate that heat into the atmosphere. Tyndall proposed that changes in the concentrations of these gases may have caused climatic changes in the past, including ice ages.457
Svante Arrhenius noted that water vapour in air continuously varied, but the CO2 concentration in air was influenced by long-term geological processes. Warming from increased CO2 levels would increase the amount of water vapour, am
plifying warming in a positive feedback loop. In 1896, he published the first climate model of its kind, projecting that halving CO2 levels could have produced a drop in temperature initiating an ice age. Arrhenius calculated the temperature increase expected from doubling CO2 to be around 5–6°C.458 Other scientists were initially sceptical and believed that the greenhouse effect was saturated so that adding more CO2 would make no difference, and that the climate would be self-regulating.459 Beg
inning in 1938, Guy Stewart Callendar published evidence that climate was warming and CO2 levels were rising,460 but his calculations met the same objections.459
In the 1950s, Gilbert Plass created a detailed computer model that included different atmospheric layers and the infrared spectrum. This model predicted that increasing CO2 levels would cause warming. Around the same time, Hans Suess found evidence that CO2 levels had been rising, and Roger Revelle showed that the oceans would not absor
b the increase. The two scientists subsequently helped Charles Keeling to begin a record of continued increase—the "Keeling Curve"459—which was part of continued scientific investigation through the 1960s into possible human causation of global warming.463 Studies such as the National Research Council's 1979 Charney Report supported the accuracy of climate models that forecast significant warming.464 Human causation of observed global warming and dangers of unmitigated warming were publicly pres
ented in James Hansen's 1988 testimony before a US Senate committee.46540 The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), set up in 1988 to provide formal advice to the world's governments, spurred interdisciplinary research.466 As part of the IPCC reports, scientists assess the scientific discussion that takes place in peer-reviewed journal articles.467
There is a nearly unanimous scientific consensus that the climate is warming and that this is caused by human activities.5 No scientific 
body of national or international standing disagrees with this view.468 As of 2019, agreement in recent literature reached over 99%.4255 The 2021 IPCC Assessment Report stated that it is "unequivocal" that climate change is caused by humans.5 Consensus has further developed that action should be taken to protect people against the impacts of climate change. National science academies have called on world leaders to cut global emissions.469
Extreme event attribution (EEA), also known as attributi
on science, was developed in the early decades of the 21st century.470 EEA uses climate models to identify and quantify the role that human-caused climate change plays in the frequency, intensity, duration, and impacts of specific individual extreme weather events.471472 Results of attribution studies allow scientists and journalists to make statements such as, "this weather event was made at least n times more likely by human-caused climate change" or "this heatwave was made m degrees hotter th
an it would have been in a world without global warming" or "this event was effectively impossible without climate change".473
Greater computing power in the 2000s and conceptual breakthroughs in the early to mid 2010s474 enabled attribution science to detect the effects of climate change on some events with high confidence.470 Scientists use attribution methods and climate simulations that have already been peer reviewed, allowing "rapid attribution studies" to be published within a "news cycle
" time frame after weather events.474
Special Report: The Ocean and Cryosphere in a Changing Climate

An ecosystem (or ecological system) is a system formed by organisms in interaction with their environment.2458 The biotic and abiotic components are linked together through nutrient cycles and energy flows.
Ecosystems are controlled by external and internal factors. External factors—including climate—control the ecosystem's structure, but are not influenced by it. By contrast, internal factors control and are controlled by ecosystem processes; these include decomposition, the types of species pr
esent, root competition, shading, disturbance, and succession. While external factors generally determine which resource inputs an ecosystem has, their availability within the ecosystem is controlled by internal factors. Ecosystems are dynamic, subject to periodic disturbances and always in the process of recovering from past disturbances. The tendency of an ecosystem to remain close to its equilibrium state, is termed its resistance. Its capacity to absorb disturbance and reorganize, while unde
rgoing change so as to retain essentially the same function, structure, identity, is termed its ecological resilience.
Ecosystems can be studied through a variety of approaches—theoretical studies, studies monitoring specific ecosystems over long periods of time, those that look at differences between ecosystems to elucidate how they work and direct manipulative experimentation. Biomes are general classes or categories of ecosystems. However, there is no clear distinction between biomes and ecos
ystems. Ecosystem classifications are specific kinds of ecological classifications that consider all four elements of the definition of ecosystems: a biotic component, an abiotic complex, the interactions between and within them, and the physical space they occupy. Biotic factors are living things, such as plants, while abiotic factors are non-living components, such as soil. Plants allow energy to enter the system through photosynthesis, building up plant tissue. Animals play an important role 
in the movement of matter and energy through the system, by feeding on plants and one another. They also influence the quantity of plant and microbial biomass present. By breaking down dead organic matter, decomposers release carbon back to the atmosphere and facilitate nutrient cycling by converting nutrients stored in dead biomass back to a form that can be readily used by plants and microbes.
Ecosystems provide a variety of goods and services upon which people depend, and may be part of. Ecos
ystem goods include the "tangible, material products" of ecosystem processes such as water, food, fuel, construction material, and medicinal plants. Ecosystem services, on the other hand, are generally "improvements in the condition or location of things of value". These include maintenance of hydrological cycles, cleaning air and water, the maintenance of oxygen in the atmosphere, crop pollination, and opportunities for research. Many ecosystems become degraded through human impacts, such as so
il loss, air and water pollution, habitat fragmentation, water diversion, fire suppression, and introduced species and invasive species. These threats can lead to abrupt transformation of the ecosystem or to gradual disruption of biotic processes and degradation of abiotic conditions of the ecosystem. Once the original ecosystem has lost its defining features, it is considered "collapsed". Ecosystem restoration can contribute to achieving the Sustainable Development Goals.
An ecosystem (or ecolo
gical system) consists of all the organisms and the abiotic pools (or physical environment) with which they interact.3452458 The biotic and abiotic components are linked together through nutrient cycles and energy flows.5
"Ecosystem processes" are the transfers of energy and materials from one pool to another.2458 Ecosystem processes are known to "take place at a wide range of scales". Therefore, the correct scale of study depends on the question asked.45
The term "ecosystem" was first used in 1
935 in a publication by British ecologist Arthur Tansley. The term was coined by Arthur Roy Clapham, who came up with the word at Tansley's request.6 Tansley devised the concept to draw attention to the importance of transfers of materials between organisms and their environment.49 He later refined the term, describing it as "The whole system, ... including not only the organism-complex, but also the whole complex of physical factors forming what we call the environment".3 Tansley regarded ecosy
stems not simply as natural units, but as "mental isolates".3 Tansley later defined the spatial extent of ecosystems using the term "ecotope".7
G. Evelyn Hutchinson, a limnologist who was a contemporary of Tansley's, combined Charles Elton's ideas about trophic ecology with those of Russian geochemist Vladimir Vernadsky. As a result, he suggested that mineral nutrient availability in a lake limited algal production. This would, in turn, limit the abundance of animals that feed on algae. Raymond 
Lindeman took these ideas further to suggest that the flow of energy through a lake was the primary driver of the ecosystem. Hutchinson's students, brothers Howard T. Odum and Eugene P. Odum, further developed a "systems approach" to the study of ecosystems. This allowed them to study the flow of energy and material through ecological systems.49
Ecosystems are controlled by both external and internal factors. External factors, also called state factors, control the overall structure of an ecosys
tem and the way things work within it, but are not themselves influenced by the ecosystem. On broad geographic scales, climate is the factor that "most strongly determines ecosystem processes and structure".414 Climate determines the biome in which the ecosystem is embedded. Rainfall patterns and seasonal temperatures influence photosynthesis and thereby determine the amount of energy available to the ecosystem.8145
Parent material determines the nature of the soil in an ecosystem, and influence
s the supply of mineral nutrients. Topography also controls ecosystem processes by affecting things like microclimate, soil development and the movement of water through a system. For example, ecosystems can be quite different if situated in a small depression on the landscape, versus one present on an adjacent steep hillside.9391066
Other external factors that play an important role in ecosystem functioning include time and potential biota, the organisms that are present in a region and could p
otentially occupy a particular site. Ecosystems in similar environments that are located in different parts of the world can end up doing things very differently simply because they have different pools of species present.11321 The introduction of non-native species can cause substantial shifts in ecosystem function.12
Unlike external factors, internal factors in ecosystems not only control ecosystem processes but are also controlled by them.416 While the resource inputs are generally controlled
 by external processes like climate and parent material, the availability of these resources within the ecosystem is controlled by internal factors like decomposition, root competition or shading.13 Other factors like disturbance, succession or the types of species present are also internal factors.
Primary production is the production of organic matter from inorganic carbon sources. This mainly occurs through photosynthesis. The energy incorporated through this process supports life on earth, w
hile the carbon makes up much of the organic matter in living and dead biomass, soil carbon and fossil fuels. It also drives the carbon cycle, which influences global climate via the greenhouse effect.
Through the process of photosynthesis, plants capture energy from light and use it to combine carbon dioxide and water to produce carbohydrates and oxygen. The photosynthesis carried out by all the plants in an ecosystem is called the gross primary production (GPP).8124 About half of the gross GPP
 is respired by plants in order to provide the energy that supports their growth and maintenance.14157 The remainder, that portion of GPP that is not used up by respiration, is known as the net primary production (NPP).14157 Total photosynthesis is limited by a range of environmental factors. These include the amount of light available, the amount of leaf area a plant has to capture light , the rate at which carbon dioxide can be supplied to the chloroplasts to support photosynthesis, the availa
bility of water, and the availability of suitable temperatures for carrying out photosynthesis.8155
Energy and carbon enter ecosystems through photosynthesis, are incorporated into living tissue, transferred to other organisms that feed on the living and dead plant matter, and eventually released through respiration.14157 The carbon and energy incorporated into plant tissues (net primary production) is either consumed by animals while the plant is alive, or it remains uneaten when the plant tiss
ue dies and becomes detritus. In terrestrial ecosystems, the vast majority of the net primary production ends up being broken down by decomposers. The remainder is consumed by animals while still alive and enters the plant-based trophic system. After plants and animals die, the organic matter contained in them enters the detritus-based trophic system.15
Ecosystem respiration is the sum of respiration by all living organisms (plants, animals, and decomposers) in the ecosystem.16 Net ecosystem pro
duction is the difference between gross primary production (GPP) and ecosystem respiration.17 In the absence of disturbance, net ecosystem production is equivalent to the net carbon accumulation in the ecosystem.
Energy can also be released from an ecosystem through disturbances such as wildfire or transferred to other ecosystems  by erosion.
In aquatic systems, the proportion of plant biomass that gets consumed by herbivores is much higher than in terrestrial systems.15 In trophic systems, phot
osynthetic organisms are the primary producers. The organisms that consume their tissues are called primary consumers or secondary producers—herbivores. Organisms which feed on microbes (bacteria and fungi) are termed microbivores. Animals that feed on primary consumers—carnivores—are secondary consumers. Each of these constitutes a trophic level.15
The sequence of consumption—from plant to herbivore, to carnivore—forms a food chain. Real systems are much more complex than this—organisms will ge
nerally feed on more than one form of food, and may feed at more than one trophic level. Carnivores may capture some prey that is part of a plant-based trophic system and others that are part of a detritus-based trophic system . Real systems, with all these complexities, form food webs rather than food chains which present a number of common, non random properties in the topology of their network.18
The carbon and nutrients in dead organic matter are broken down by a group of processes known as 
decomposition. This releases nutrients that can then be re-used for plant and microbial production and returns carbon dioxide to the atmosphere (or water) where it can be used for photosynthesis. In the absence of decomposition, the dead organic matter would accumulate in an ecosystem, and nutrients and atmospheric carbon dioxide would be depleted.19183
Decomposition processes can be separated into three categories—leaching, fragmentation and chemical alteration of dead material. As water moves 
through dead organic matter, it dissolves and carries with it the water-soluble components. These are then taken up by organisms in the soil, react with mineral soil, or are transported beyond the confines of the ecosystem (and are considered lost to it).20271–280 Newly shed leaves and newly dead animals have high concentrations of water-soluble components and include sugars, amino acids and mineral nutrients. Leaching is more important in wet environments and less important in dry ones.1069–77

Fragmentation processes break organic material into smaller pieces, exposing new surfaces for colonization by microbes. Freshly shed leaf litter may be inaccessible due to an outer layer of cuticle or bark, and cell contents are protected by a cell wall. Newly dead animals may be covered by an exoskeleton. Fragmentation processes, which break through these protective layers, accelerate the rate of microbial decomposition.19184 Animals fragment detritus as they hunt for food, as does passage thro
ugh the gut. Freeze-thaw cycles and cycles of wetting and drying also fragment dead material.19186
The chemical alteration of the dead organic matter is primarily achieved through bacterial and fungal action. Fungal hyphae produce enzymes that can break through the tough outer structures surrounding dead plant material. They also produce enzymes that break down lignin, which allows them access to both cell contents and the nitrogen in the lignin. Fungi can transfer carbon and nitrogen through th
eir hyphal networks and thus, unlike bacteria, are not dependent solely on locally available resources.19186
Decomposition rates vary among ecosystems.21 The rate of decomposition is governed by three sets of factors—the physical environment , the quantity and quality of the dead material available to decomposers, and the nature of the microbial community itself.19194 Temperature controls the rate of microbial respiration; the higher the temperature, the faster the microbial decomposition occurs
. Temperature also affects soil moisture, which affects decomposition. Freeze-thaw cycles also affect decomposition—freezing temperatures kill soil microorganisms, which allows leaching to play a more important role in moving nutrients around. This can be especially important as the soil thaws in the spring, creating a pulse of nutrients that become available.20280
Decomposition rates are low under very wet or very dry conditions. Decomposition rates are highest in wet, moist conditions with ade
quate levels of oxygen. Wet soils tend to become deficient in oxygen (this is especially true in wetlands), which slows microbial growth. In dry soils, decomposition slows as well, but bacteria continue to grow (albeit at a slower rate) even after soils become too dry to support plant growth.19200
Ecosystems are dynamic entities. They are subject to periodic disturbances and are always in the process of recovering from past disturbances.22347 When a perturbation occurs, an ecosystem responds by 
moving away from its initial state. The tendency of an ecosystem to remain close to its equilibrium state, despite that disturbance, is termed its resistance. The capacity of a system to absorb disturbance and reorganize while undergoing change so as to retain essentially the same function, structure, identity, and feedbacks is termed its ecological resilience.2324 Resilience thinking also includes humanity as an integral part of the biosphere where we are dependent on ecosystem services for our
 survival and must build and maintain their natural capacities to withstand shocks and disturbances.25 Time plays a central role over a wide range, for example, in the slow development of soil from bare rock and the faster recovery of a community from disturbance.1467
Disturbance also plays an important role in ecological processes. F. Stuart Chapin and coauthors define disturbance as "a relatively discrete event in time that removes plant biomass".22346 This can range from herbivore outbreaks, 
treefalls, fires, hurricanes, floods, glacial advances, to volcanic eruptions. Such disturbances can cause large changes in plant, animal and microbe populations, as well as soil organic matter content. Disturbance is followed by succession, a "directional change in ecosystem structure and functioning resulting from biotically driven changes in resource supply."2470
The frequency and severity of disturbance determine the way it affects ecosystem function. A major disturbance like a volcanic erup
tion or glacial advance and retreat leave behind soils that lack plants, animals or organic matter. Ecosystems that experience such disturbances undergo primary succession. A less severe disturbance like forest fires, hurricanes or cultivation result in secondary succession and a faster recovery.22348 More severe and more frequent disturbance result in longer recovery times.
From one year to another, ecosystems experience variation in their biotic and abiotic environments. A drought, a colder th
an usual winter, and a pest outbreak all are short-term variability in environmental conditions. Animal populations vary from year to year, building up during resource-rich periods and crashing as they overshoot their food supply. Longer-term changes also shape ecosystem processes. For example, the forests of eastern North America still show legacies of cultivation which ceased in 1850 when large areas were reverted to forests.22340 Another example is the methane production in eastern Siberian l
akes that is controlled by organic matter which accumulated during the Pleistocene.26
Ecosystems continually exchange energy and carbon with the wider environment. Mineral nutrients, on the other hand, are mostly cycled back and forth between plants, animals, microbes and the soil. Most nitrogen enters ecosystems through biological nitrogen fixation, is deposited through precipitation, dust, gases or is applied as fertilizer.20266 Most terrestrial ecosystems are nitrogen-limited in the short ter
m making nitrogen cycling an important control on ecosystem production.20289 Over the long term, phosphorus availability can also be critical.27
Macronutrients which are required by all plants in large quantities include the primary nutrients : Nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium.28231 Secondary major nutrients (less often limiting) include: Calcium, magnesium, sulfur. Micronutrients required by all plants in small quantities include boron, chloride, copper, iron, manganese, molybdenum, zinc. Finall
y, there are also beneficial nutrients which may be required by certain plants or by plants under specific environmental conditions: aluminum, cobalt, iodine, nickel, selenium, silicon, sodium, vanadium.28231
Until modern times, nitrogen fixation was the major source of nitrogen for ecosystems. Nitrogen-fixing bacteria either live symbiotically with plants or live freely in the soil. The energetic cost is high for plants that support nitrogen-fixing symbionts—as much as 25% of gross primary prod
uction when measured in controlled conditions. Many members of the legume plant family support nitrogen-fixing symbionts. Some cyanobacteria are also capable of nitrogen fixation. These are phototrophs, which carry out photosynthesis. Like other nitrogen-fixing bacteria, they can either be free-living or have symbiotic relationships with plants.22360 Other sources of nitrogen include acid deposition produced through the combustion of fossil fuels, ammonia gas which evaporates from agricultural f
ields which have had fertilizers applied to them, and dust.20270 Anthropogenic nitrogen inputs account for about 80% of all nitrogen fluxes in ecosystems.20270
When plant tissues are shed or are eaten, the nitrogen in those tissues becomes available to animals and microbes. Microbial decomposition releases nitrogen compounds from dead organic matter in the soil, where plants, fungi, and bacteria compete for it. Some soil bacteria use organic nitrogen-containing compounds as a source of carbon, a
nd release ammonium ions into the soil. This process is known as nitrogen mineralization. Others convert ammonium to nitrite and nitrate ions, a process known as nitrification. Nitric oxide and nitrous oxide are also produced during nitrification.20277 Under nitrogen-rich and oxygen-poor conditions, nitrates and nitrites are converted to nitrogen gas, a process known as denitrification.20281
Mycorrhizal fungi which are symbiotic with plant roots, use carbohydrates supplied by the plants and in r
eturn transfer phosphorus and nitrogen compounds back to the plant roots.2930 This is an important pathway of organic nitrogen transfer from dead organic matter to plants. This mechanism may contribute to more than 70 Tg of annually assimilated plant nitrogen, thereby playing a critical role in global nutrient cycling and ecosystem function.30
Phosphorus enters ecosystems through weathering. As ecosystems age this supply diminishes, making phosphorus-limitation more common in older landscapes (e
specially in the tropics).20287–290 Calcium and sulfur are also produced by weathering, but acid deposition is an important source of sulfur in many ecosystems. Although magnesium and manganese are produced by weathering, exchanges between soil organic matter and living cells account for a significant portion of ecosystem fluxes. Potassium is primarily cycled between living cells and soil organic matter.20291
Biodiversity plays an important role in ecosystem functioning.32449–453 Ecosystem proce
sses are driven by the species in an ecosystem, the nature of the individual species, and the relative abundance of organisms among these species. Ecosystem processes are the net effect of the actions of individual organisms as they interact with their environment. Ecological theory suggests that in order to coexist, species must have some level of limiting similarity—they must be different from one another in some fundamental way, otherwise, one species would competitively exclude the other.33 
Despite this, the cumulative effect of additional species in an ecosystem is not linear: additional species may enhance nitrogen retention, for example. However, beyond some level of species richness,11331 additional species may have little additive effect unless they differ substantially from species already present.11324 This is the case for example for exotic species.11321
The addition (or loss) of species that are ecologically similar to those already present in an ecosystem tends to only ha
ve a small effect on ecosystem function. Ecologically distinct species, on the other hand, have a much larger effect. Similarly, dominant species have a large effect on ecosystem function, while rare species tend to have a small effect. Keystone species tend to have an effect on ecosystem function that is disproportionate to their abundance in an ecosystem.11324
An ecosystem engineer is any organism that creates, significantly modifies, maintains or destroys a habitat.34
Ecosystem ecology is the
 "study of the interactions between organisms and their environment as an integrated system".2458 The size of ecosystems can range up to ten orders of magnitude, from the surface layers of rocks to the surface of the planet.46
The Hubbard Brook Ecosystem Study started in 1963 to study the White Mountains in New Hampshire. It was the first successful attempt to study an entire watershed as an ecosystem. The study used stream chemistry as a means of monitoring ecosystem properties, and developed a
 detailed biogeochemical model of the ecosystem.35 Long-term research at the site led to the discovery of acid rain in North America in 1972. Researchers documented the depletion of soil cations (especially calcium) over the next several decades.36
Ecosystems can be studied through a variety of approaches—theoretical studies, studies monitoring specific ecosystems over long periods of time, those that look at differences between ecosystems to elucidate how they work and direct manipulative exper
imentation.37 Studies can be carried out at a variety of scales, ranging from whole-ecosystem studies to studying microcosms or mesocosms .38 American ecologist Stephen R. Carpenter has argued that microcosm experiments can be "irrelevant and diversionary" if they are not carried out in conjunction with field studies done at the ecosystem scale. In such cases, microcosm experiments may fail to accurately predict ecosystem-level dynamics.39
Biomes are general classes or categories of ecosystems.4
14 However, there is no clear distinction between biomes and ecosystems.40 Biomes are always defined at a very general level. Ecosystems can be described at levels that range from very general  to very specific, such as "wet coastal needle-leafed forests".
Biomes vary due to global variations in climate. Biomes are often defined by their structure: at a general level, for example, tropical forests, temperate grasslands, and arctic tundra.414 There can be any degree of subcategories among ecosyst
em types that comprise a biome, e.g., needle-leafed boreal forests or wet tropical forests. Although ecosystems are most commonly categorized by their structure and geography, there are also other ways to categorize and classify ecosystems such as by their level of human impact (see anthropogenic biome), or by their integration with social processes or technological processes or their novelty (e.g. novel ecosystem). Each of these taxonomies of ecosystems tends to emphasize different structural o
r functional properties.41 None of these is the "best" classification.
Ecosystem classifications are specific kinds of ecological classifications that consider all four elements of the definition of ecosystems: a biotic component, an abiotic complex, the interactions between and within them, and the physical space they occupy.41 Different approaches to ecological classifications have been developed in terrestrial, freshwater and marine disciplines, and a function-based typology has been proposed
 to leverage the strengths of these different approaches into a unified system.42
Human activities are important in almost all ecosystems. Although humans exist and operate within ecosystems, their cumulative effects are large enough to influence external factors like climate.414
Ecosystems provide a variety of goods and services upon which people depend.43 Ecosystem goods include the "tangible, material products" of ecosystem processes such as water, food, fuel, construction material, and medic
inal plants.4445 They also include less tangible items like tourism and recreation, and genes from wild plants and animals that can be used to improve domestic species.43
Ecosystem services, on the other hand, are generally "improvements in the condition or location of things of value".45 These include things like the maintenance of hydrological cycles, cleaning air and water, the maintenance of oxygen in the atmosphere, crop pollination and even things like beauty, inspiration and opportunities
 for research.43 While material from the ecosystem had traditionally been recognized as being the basis for things of economic value, ecosystem services tend to be taken for granted.45
The Millennium Ecosystem Assessment is an international synthesis by over 1000 of the world's leading biological scientists that analyzes the state of the Earth's ecosystems and provides summaries and guidelines for decision-makers. The report identified four major categories of ecosystem services: provisioning, r
egulating, cultural and supporting services.46 It concludes that human activity is having a significant and escalating impact on the biodiversity of the world ecosystems, reducing both their resilience and biocapacity. The report refers to natural systems as humanity's "life-support system", providing essential ecosystem services. The assessment measures 24 ecosystem services and concludes that only four have shown improvement over the last 50 years, 15 are in serious decline, and five are in a 
precarious condition.466–19
The Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services (IPBES) is an intergovernmental organization established to improve the interface between science and policy on issues of biodiversity and ecosystem services.4748 It is intended to serve a similar role to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.49
Ecosystem services are limited and also threatened by human activities.50 To help inform decision-makers, many ecosystem services are
 being assigned economic values, often based on the cost of replacement with anthropogenic alternatives. The ongoing challenge of prescribing economic value to nature, for example through biodiversity banking, is prompting transdisciplinary shifts in how we recognize and manage the environment, social responsibility, business opportunities, and our future as a species.50
As human population and per capita consumption grow, so do the resource demands imposed on ecosystems and the effects of the h
uman ecological footprint. Natural resources are vulnerable and limited. The environmental impacts of anthropogenic actions are becoming more apparent. Problems for all ecosystems include: environmental pollution, climate change and biodiversity loss. For terrestrial ecosystems further threats include air pollution, soil degradation, and deforestation. For aquatic ecosystems threats also include unsustainable exploitation of marine resources (for example overfishing), marine pollution, microplas
tics pollution, the effects of climate change on oceans (e.g. warming and acidification), and building on coastal areas.51
Many ecosystems become degraded through human impacts, such as soil loss, air and water pollution, habitat fragmentation, water diversion, fire suppression, and introduced species and invasive species.52437
These threats can lead to abrupt transformation of the ecosystem or to gradual disruption of biotic processes and degradation of abiotic conditions of the ecosystem. Once
 the original ecosystem has lost its defining features, it is considered collapsed (see also IUCN Red List of Ecosystems).53 Ecosystem collapse could be reversible and in this way differs from species extinction.54 Quantitative assessments of the risk of collapse are used as measures of conservation status and trends.
When natural resource management is applied to whole ecosystems, rather than single species, it is termed ecosystem management.55 Although definitions of ecosystem management aboun
d, there is a common set of principles which underlie these definitions: A fundamental principle is the long-term sustainability of the production of goods and services by the ecosystem;52 "intergenerational sustainability  a precondition for management, not an afterthought".43 While ecosystem management can be used as part of a plan for wilderness conservation, it can also be used in intensively managed ecosystems43 .
Integrated conservation and development projects (ICDPs) aim to address conse
rvation and human livelihood (sustainable development) concerns in developing countries together, rather than separately as was often done in the past.52445
The following articles are types of ecosystems for particular types of regions or zones:
Ecosystem instances in specific regions of the world:

Deoxyribonucleic acid (pronunciationⓘ;1 DNA) is a polymer composed of two polynucleotide chains that coil around each other to form a double helix. The polymer carries genetic instructions for the development, functioning, growth and reproduction of all known organisms and many viruses. DNA and ribonucleic acid (RNA) are nucleic acids. Alongside proteins, lipids and complex carbohydrates (polysaccharides), nucleic acids are one of the four major types of macromolecules that are essential for all
 known forms of life.
The two DNA strands are known as polynucleotides as they are composed of simpler monomeric units called nucleotides.23 Each nucleotide is composed of one of four nitrogen-containing nucleobases , a sugar called deoxyribose, and a phosphate group. The nucleotides are joined to one another in a chain by covalent bonds (known as the phosphodiester linkage) between the sugar of one nucleotide and the phosphate of the next, resulting in an alternating sugar-phosphate backbone. T
he nitrogenous bases of the two separate polynucleotide strands are bound together, according to base pairing rules (A with T and C with G), with hydrogen bonds to make double-stranded DNA. The complementary nitrogenous bases are divided into two groups, the single-ringed pyrimidines and the double-ringed purines. In DNA, the pyrimidines are thymine and cytosine; the purines are adenine and guanine.
Both strands of double-stranded DNA store the same biological information. This information is re
plicated when the two strands separate. The two strands of DNA run in opposite directions to each other and are thus antiparallel. Attached to each sugar is one of four types of nucleobases (or bases). It is the sequence of these four nucleobases along the backbone that encodes genetic information. RNA strands are created using DNA strands as a template in a process called transcription, where DNA bases are exchanged for their corresponding bases except in the case of thymine (T), for which RNA 
substitutes uracil (U).4 Under the genetic code, these RNA strands specify the sequence of amino acids within proteins in a process called translation.
Within eukaryotic cells, DNA is organized into long structures called chromosomes. Before typical cell division, these chromosomes are duplicated in the process of DNA replication, providing a complete set of chromosomes for each daughter cell. Eukaryotic organisms (animals, plants, fungi and protists) store most of their DNA inside the cell nucl
eus as nuclear DNA, and some in the mitochondria as mitochondrial DNA or in chloroplasts as chloroplast DNA.5 In contrast, prokaryotes (bacteria and archaea) store their DNA only in the cytoplasm, in circular chromosomes. Within eukaryotic chromosomes, chromatin proteins, such as histones, compact and organize DNA. These compacting structures guide the interactions between DNA and other proteins, helping control which parts of the DNA are transcribed.
DNA is a long polymer made from repeating un
its called nucleotides.67 The structure of DNA is dynamic along its length, being capable of coiling into tight loops and other shapes.8 In all species it is composed of two helical chains, bound to each other by hydrogen bonds. Both chains are coiled around the same axis, and have the same pitch of 34 ångströms (3.4nm). The pair of chains have a radius of 10Å (1.0nm).9 According to another study, when measured in a different solution, the DNA chain measured 22–26Å (2.2–2.6nm) wide, and one nucl
eotide unit measured 3.3Å (0.33nm) long.10 The buoyant density of most DNA is 1.7g/cm3.11
DNA does not usually exist as a single strand, but instead as a pair of strands that are held tightly together.912 These two long strands coil around each other, in the shape of a double helix. The nucleotide contains both a segment of the backbone of the molecule (which holds the chain together) and a nucleobase . A nucleobase linked to a sugar is called a nucleoside, and a base linked to a sugar and to on
e or more phosphate groups is called a nucleotide. A biopolymer comprising multiple linked nucleotides (as in DNA) is called a polynucleotide.13
The backbone of the DNA strand is made from alternating phosphate and sugar groups.14 The sugar in DNA is 2-deoxyribose, which is a pentose (five-carbon) sugar. The sugars are joined by phosphate groups that form phosphodiester bonds between the third and fifth carbon atoms of adjacent sugar rings. These are known as the 3′-end (three prime end), and 5′
-end (five prime end) carbons, the prime symbol being used to distinguish these carbon atoms from those of the base to which the deoxyribose forms a glycosidic bond.12
Therefore, any DNA strand normally has one end at which there is a phosphate group attached to the 5′ carbon of a ribose (the 5′ phosphoryl) and another end at which there is a free hydroxyl group attached to the 3′ carbon of a ribose (the 3′ hydroxyl). The orientation of the 3′ and 5′ carbons along the sugar-phosphate backbone co
nfers directionality (sometimes called polarity) to each DNA strand. In a nucleic acid double helix, the direction of the nucleotides in one strand is opposite to their direction in the other strand: the strands are antiparallel. The asymmetric ends of DNA strands are said to have a directionality of five prime end (5′ ), and three prime end (3′), with the 5′ end having a terminal phosphate group and the 3′ end a terminal hydroxyl group. One major difference between DNA and RNA is the sugar, wit
h the 2-deoxyribose in DNA being replaced by the related pentose sugar ribose in RNA.12
The DNA double helix is stabilized primarily by two forces: hydrogen bonds between nucleotides and base-stacking interactions among aromatic nucleobases.16 The four bases found in DNA are adenine , cytosine (C), guanine (G) and thymine (T). These four bases are attached to the sugar-phosphate to form the complete nucleotide, as shown for adenosine monophosphate. Adenine pairs with thymine and guanine pairs wi
th cytosine, forming A-T and G-C base pairs.1718
The nucleobases are classified into two types: the purines, A and G, which are fused five- and six-membered heterocyclic compounds, and the pyrimidines, the six-membered rings C and T.12 A fifth pyrimidine nucleobase, uracil (U), usually takes the place of thymine in RNA and differs from thymine by lacking a methyl group on its ring. In addition to RNA and DNA, many artificial nucleic acid analogues have been created to study the properties of nuc
leic acids, or for use in biotechnology.19
Modified bases occur in DNA. The first of these recognized was 5-methylcytosine, which was found in the genome of Mycobacterium tuberculosis in 1925.20 The reason for the presence of these noncanonical bases in bacterial viruses (bacteriophages) is to avoid the restriction enzymes present in bacteria. This enzyme system acts at least in part as a molecular immune system protecting bacteria from infection by viruses.21 Modifications of the bases cytosine
 and adenine, the more common and modified DNA bases, play vital roles in the epigenetic control of gene expression in plants and animals.22
A number of noncanonical bases are known to occur in DNA.23 Most of these are modifications of the canonical bases plus uracil.
Twin helical strands form the DNA backbone. Another double helix may be found tracing the spaces, or grooves, between the strands. These voids are adjacent to the base pairs and may provide a binding site. As the strands are not sy
mmetrically located with respect to each other, the grooves are unequally sized. The major groove is 22 ångströms (2.2nm) wide, while the minor groove is 12Å (1.2nm) in width.24 Due to the larger width of the major groove, the edges of the bases are more accessible in the major groove than in the minor groove. As a result, proteins such as transcription factors that can bind to specific sequences in double-stranded DNA usually make contact with the sides of the bases exposed in the major groove.
25 This situation varies in unusual conformations of DNA within the cell (see below), but the major and minor grooves are always named to reflect the differences in width that would be seen if the DNA was twisted back into the ordinary B form.
In a DNA double helix, each type of nucleobase on one strand bonds with just one type of nucleobase on the other strand. This is called complementary base pairing. Purines form hydrogen bonds to pyrimidines, with adenine bonding only to thymine in two hydr
ogen bonds, and cytosine bonding only to guanine in three hydrogen bonds. This arrangement of two nucleotides binding together across the double helix (from six-carbon ring to six-carbon ring) is called a Watson-Crick base pair. DNA with high GC-content is more stable than DNA with low GC-content. A Hoogsteen base pair  is a rare variation of base-pairing.26 As hydrogen bonds are not covalent, they can be broken and rejoined relatively easily. The two strands of DNA in a double helix can thus be
 pulled apart like a zipper, either by a mechanical force or high temperature.27 As a result of this base pair complementarity, all the information in the double-stranded sequence of a DNA helix is duplicated on each strand, which is vital in DNA replication. This reversible and specific interaction between complementary base pairs is critical for all the functions of DNA in organisms.7
Most DNA molecules are actually two polymer strands, bound together in a helical fashion by noncovalent bonds;
 this double-stranded (dsDNA) structure is maintained largely by the intrastrand base stacking interactions, which are strongest for G,C stacks. The two strands can come apart—a process known as melting—to form two single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) molecules. Melting occurs at high temperatures, low salt and high pH .
The stability of the dsDNA form depends not only on the GC-content (% G,C basepairs) but also on sequence (since stacking is sequence specific) and also length (longer molecules are more
 stable). The stability can be measured in various ways; a common way is the melting temperature (also called Tm value), which is the temperature at which 50% of the double-strand molecules are converted to single-strand molecules; melting temperature is dependent on ionic strength and the concentration of DNA. As a result, it is both the percentage of GC base pairs and the overall length of a DNA double helix that determines the strength of the association between the two strands of DNA. Long D
NA helices with a high GC-content have more strongly interacting strands, while short helices with high AT content have more weakly interacting strands.28 In biology, parts of the DNA double helix that need to separate easily, such as the TATAAT Pribnow box in some promoters, tend to have a high AT content, making the strands easier to pull apart.29
In the laboratory, the strength of this interaction can be measured by finding the melting temperature Tm necessary to break half of the hydrogen bo
nds. When all the base pairs in a DNA double helix melt, the strands separate and exist in solution as two entirely independent molecules. These single-stranded DNA molecules have no single common shape, but some conformations are more stable than others.30
In humans, the total female diploid nuclear genome per cell extends for 6.37 Gigabase pairs (Gbp), is 208.23cm long and weighs 6.51 picograms (pg).31 Male values are 6.27 Gbp, 205.00cm, 6.41 pg.31 Each DNA polymer can contain hundreds of mill
ions of nucleotides, such as in chromosome 1. Chromosome 1 is the largest human chromosome with approximately 220 million base pairs, and would be 85mm long if straightened.32
In eukaryotes, in addition to nuclear DNA, there is also mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) which encodes certain proteins used by the mitochondria. The mtDNA is usually relatively small in comparison to the nuclear DNA. For example, the human mitochondrial DNA forms closed circular molecules, each of which contains 16,5693334 DNA 
base pairs,35 with each such molecule normally containing a full set of the mitochondrial genes. Each human mitochondrion contains, on average, approximately 5 such mtDNA molecules.35 Each human cell contains approximately 100 mitochondria, giving a total number of mtDNA molecules per human cell of approximately 500.35 However, the amount of mitochondria per cell also varies by cell type, and an egg cell can contain 100,000 mitochondria, corresponding to up to 1,500,000 copies of the mitochondri
al genome .36
A DNA sequence is called a "sense" sequence if it is the same as that of a messenger RNA copy that is translated into protein.37 The sequence on the opposite strand is called the "antisense" sequence. Both sense and antisense sequences can exist on different parts of the same strand of DNA . In both prokaryotes and eukaryotes, antisense RNA sequences are produced, but the functions of these RNAs are not entirely clear.38 One proposal is that antisense RNAs are involved in regulatin
g gene expression through RNA-RNA base pairing.39
A few DNA sequences in prokaryotes and eukaryotes, and more in plasmids and viruses, blur the distinction between sense and antisense strands by having overlapping genes.40 In these cases, some DNA sequences do double duty, encoding one protein when read along one strand, and a second protein when read in the opposite direction along the other strand. In bacteria, this overlap may be involved in the regulation of gene transcription,41 while in vi
ruses, overlapping genes increase the amount of information that can be encoded within the small viral genome.42
DNA can be twisted like a rope in a process called DNA supercoiling. With DNA in its "relaxed" state, a strand usually circles the axis of the double helix once every 10.4 base pairs, but if the DNA is twisted the strands become more tightly or more loosely wound.43 If the DNA is twisted in the direction of the helix, this is positive supercoiling, and the bases are held more tightly 
together. If they are twisted in the opposite direction, this is negative supercoiling, and the bases come apart more easily. In nature, most DNA has slight negative supercoiling that is introduced by enzymes called topoisomerases.44 These enzymes are also needed to relieve the twisting stresses introduced into DNA strands during processes such as transcription and DNA replication.45
DNA exists in many possible conformations that include A-DNA, B-DNA, and Z-DNA forms, although only B-DNA and Z-D
NA have been directly observed in functional organisms.14 The conformation that DNA adopts depends on the hydration level, DNA sequence, the amount and direction of supercoiling, chemical modifications of the bases, the type and concentration of metal ions, and the presence of polyamines in solution.46
The first published reports of A-DNA X-ray diffraction patterns—and also B-DNA—used analyses based on Patterson functions that provided only a limited amount of structural information for oriented
 fibers of DNA.4748 An alternative analysis was proposed by Wilkins et al. in 1953 for the in vivo B-DNA X-ray diffraction-scattering patterns of highly hydrated DNA fibers in terms of squares of Bessel functions.49 In the same journal, James Watson and Francis Crick presented their molecular modeling analysis of the DNA X-ray diffraction patterns to suggest that the structure was a double helix.9
Although the B-DNA form is most common under the conditions found in cells,50 it is not a well-defi
ned conformation but a family of related DNA conformations51 that occur at the high hydration levels present in cells. Their corresponding X-ray diffraction and scattering patterns are characteristic of molecular paracrystals with a significant degree of disorder.5253
Compared to B-DNA, the A-DNA form is a wider right-handed spiral, with a shallow, wide minor groove and a narrower, deeper major groove. The A form occurs under non-physiological conditions in partly dehydrated samples of DNA, whil
e in the cell it may be produced in hybrid pairings of DNA and RNA strands, and in enzyme-DNA complexes.5455 Segments of DNA where the bases have been chemically modified by methylation may undergo a larger change in conformation and adopt the Z form. Here, the strands turn about the helical axis in a left-handed spiral, the opposite of the more common B form.56 These unusual structures can be recognized by specific Z-DNA binding proteins and may be involved in the regulation of transcription.57

For many years, exobiologists have proposed the existence of a shadow biosphere, a postulated microbial biosphere of Earth that uses radically different biochemical and molecular processes than currently known life. One of the proposals was the existence of lifeforms that use arsenic instead of phosphorus in DNA. A report in 2010 of the possibility in the bacterium GFAJ-1 was announced,5859 though the research was disputed,5960 and evidence suggests the bacterium actively prevents the incorpora
tion of arsenic into the DNA backbone and other biomolecules.61
At the ends of the linear chromosomes are specialized regions of DNA called telomeres. The main function of these regions is to allow the cell to replicate chromosome ends using the enzyme telomerase, as the enzymes that normally replicate DNA cannot copy the extreme 3′ ends of chromosomes.63 These specialized chromosome caps also help protect the DNA ends, and stop the DNA repair systems in the cell from treating them as damage to 
be corrected.64 In human cells, telomeres are usually lengths of single-stranded DNA containing several thousand repeats of a simple TTAGGG sequence.65
These guanine-rich sequences may stabilize chromosome ends by forming structures of stacked sets of four-base units, rather than the usual base pairs found in other DNA molecules. Here, four guanine bases, known as a guanine tetrad, form a flat plate. These flat four-base units then stack on top of each other to form a stable G-quadruplex structu
re.66 These structures are stabilized by hydrogen bonding between the edges of the bases and chelation of a metal ion in the centre of each four-base unit.67 Other structures can also be formed, with the central set of four bases coming from either a single strand folded around the bases, or several different parallel strands, each contributing one base to the central structure.
In addition to these stacked structures, telomeres also form large loop structures called telomere loops, or T-loops. 
Here, the single-stranded DNA curls around in a long circle stabilized by telomere-binding proteins.68 At the very end of the T-loop, the single-stranded telomere DNA is held onto a region of double-stranded DNA by the telomere strand disrupting the double-helical DNA and base pairing to one of the two strands. This triple-stranded structure is called a displacement loop or D-loop.66
In DNA, fraying occurs when non-complementary regions exist at the end of an otherwise complementary double-stran
d of DNA. However, branched DNA can occur if a third strand of DNA is introduced and contains adjoining regions able to hybridize with the frayed regions of the pre-existing double-strand. Although the simplest example of branched DNA involves only three strands of DNA, complexes involving additional strands and multiple branches are also possible.69 Branched DNA can be used in nanotechnology to construct geometric shapes, see the section on uses in technology below.
Several artificial nucleobas
es have been synthesized, and successfully incorporated in the eight-base DNA analogue named Hachimoji DNA. Dubbed S, B, P, and Z, these artificial bases are capable of bonding with each other in a predictable way (S–B and P–Z), maintain the double helix structure of DNA, and be transcribed to RNA. Their existence could be seen as an indication that there is nothing special about the four natural nucleobases that evolved on Earth.7071 On the other hand, DNA is tightly related to RNA which does n
ot only act as a transcript of DNA but also performs as molecular machines many tasks in cells. For this purpose it has to fold into a structure. It has been shown that to allow to create all possible structures at least four bases are required for the corresponding RNA,72 while a higher number is also possible but this would be against the natural principle of least effort.
The phosphate groups of DNA give it similar acidic properties to phosphoric acid and it can be considered as a strong acid
. It will be fully ionized at a normal cellular pH, releasing protons which leave behind negative charges on the phosphate groups. These negative charges protect DNA from breakdown by hydrolysis by repelling nucleophiles which could hydrolyze it.73
Pure DNA extracted from cells forms white, stringy clumps.74
The expression of genes is influenced by how the DNA is packaged in chromosomes, in a structure called chromatin. Base modifications can be involved in packaging, with regions that have low 
or no gene expression usually containing high levels of methylation of cytosine bases. DNA packaging and its influence on gene expression can also occur by covalent modifications of the histone protein core around which DNA is wrapped in the chromatin structure or else by remodeling carried out by chromatin remodeling complexes (see Chromatin remodeling). There is, further, crosstalk between DNA methylation and histone modification, so they can coordinately affect chromatin and gene expression.7
5
For one example, cytosine methylation produces 5-methylcytosine, which is important for X-inactivation of chromosomes.76 The average level of methylation varies between organisms—the worm Caenorhabditis elegans lacks cytosine methylation, while vertebrates have higher levels, with up to 1% of their DNA containing 5-methylcytosine.77 Despite the importance of 5-methylcytosine, it can deaminate to leave a thymine base, so methylated cytosines are particularly prone to mutations.78 Other base mod
ifications include adenine methylation in bacteria, the presence of 5-hydroxymethylcytosine in the brain,79 and the glycosylation of uracil to produce the "J-base" in kinetoplastids.8081
DNA can be damaged by many sorts of mutagens, which change the DNA sequence. Mutagens include oxidizing agents, alkylating agents and also high-energy electromagnetic radiation such as ultraviolet light and X-rays. The type of DNA damage produced depends on the type of mutagen. For example, UV light can damage D
NA by producing thymine dimers, which are cross-links between pyrimidine bases.83 On the other hand, oxidants such as free radicals or hydrogen peroxide produce multiple forms of damage, including base modifications, particularly of guanosine, and double-strand breaks.84 A typical human cell contains about 150,000 bases that have suffered oxidative damage.85 Of these oxidative lesions, the most dangerous are double-strand breaks, as these are difficult to repair and can produce point mutations, 
insertions, deletions from the DNA sequence, and chromosomal translocations.86 These mutations can cause cancer. Because of inherent limits in the DNA repair mechanisms, if humans lived long enough, they would all eventually develop cancer.8788 DNA damages that are naturally occurring, due to normal cellular processes that produce reactive oxygen species, the hydrolytic activities of cellular water, etc., also occur frequently. Although most of these damages are repaired, in any cell some DNA da
mage may remain despite the action of repair processes. These remaining DNA damages accumulate with age in mammalian postmitotic tissues. This accumulation appears to be an important underlying cause of aging.899091
Many mutagens fit into the space between two adjacent base pairs, this is called intercalation. Most intercalators are aromatic and planar molecules; examples include ethidium bromide, acridines, daunomycin, and doxorubicin. For an intercalator to fit between base pairs, the bases mu
st separate, distorting the DNA strands by unwinding of the double helix. This inhibits both transcription and DNA replication, causing toxicity and mutations.92 As a result, DNA intercalators may be carcinogens, and in the case of thalidomide, a teratogen.93 Others such as benzopyrene diol epoxide and aflatoxin form DNA adducts that induce errors in replication.94 Nevertheless, due to their ability to inhibit DNA transcription and replication, other similar toxins are also used in chemotherapy 
to inhibit rapidly growing cancer cells.95
DNA usually occurs as linear chromosomes in eukaryotes, and circular chromosomes in prokaryotes. The set of chromosomes in a cell makes up its genome; the human genome has approximately 3 billion base pairs of DNA arranged into 46 chromosomes.96 The information carried by DNA is held in the sequence of pieces of DNA called genes. Transmission of genetic information in genes is achieved via complementary base pairing. For example, in transcription, when 
a cell uses the information in a gene, the DNA sequence is copied into a complementary RNA sequence through the attraction between the DNA and the correct RNA nucleotides. Usually, this RNA copy is then used to make a matching protein sequence in a process called translation, which depends on the same interaction between RNA nucleotides. In an alternative fashion, a cell may copy its genetic information in a process called DNA replication. The details of these functions are covered in other arti
cles; here the focus is on the interactions between DNA and other molecules that mediate the function of the genome.
Genomic DNA is tightly and orderly packed in the process called DNA condensation, to fit the small available volumes of the cell. In eukaryotes, DNA is located in the cell nucleus, with small amounts in mitochondria and chloroplasts. In prokaryotes, the DNA is held within an irregularly shaped body in the cytoplasm called the nucleoid.97
The functional genetic information in a gen
ome is located in genes, regulatory sequences, origins of replication, centromeres, telomeres, and segments required for the three-dimensional structure of chromatin. In many complex eukaryotes, only a small fraction of the total sequence is devoted to the various functional elements. For example, in humans less than 10% of the genome has a defined functional role and the rest (90%) is probably junk DNA. (See also .)
A gene is a sequence of DNA that contains genetic information and can influence
 the phenotype of an organism. Within a gene, the sequence of bases along a DNA strand defines a messenger RNA sequence, which then defines one or more protein sequences. The relationship between the nucleotide sequences of genes and the amino-acid sequences of proteins is determined by the rules of translation, known collectively as the genetic code. The genetic code consists of three-letter 'words' called codons formed from a sequence of three nucleotides (e.g., ACT, CAG, TTT).
In transcriptio
n, the codons of a gene are copied into messenger RNA by RNA polymerase. This RNA copy is then decoded by a ribosome that reads the RNA sequence by base-pairing the messenger RNA to transfer RNA, which carries amino acids. Since there are 4 bases in 3-letter combinations, there are 64 possible codons (43combinations). These encode the twenty standard amino acids, giving most amino acids more than one possible codon. There are also three 'stop' or 'nonsense' codons signifying the end of the codin
g region; these are the TAG, TAA, and TGA codons, (UAG, UAA, and UGA on the mRNA).
Cell division is essential for an organism to grow, but, when a cell divides, it must replicate the DNA in its genome so that the two daughter cells have the same genetic information as their parent. The double-stranded structure of DNA provides a simple mechanism for DNA replication. Here, the two strands are separated and then each strand's complementary DNA sequence is recreated by an enzyme called DNA polymera
se. This enzyme makes the complementary strand by finding the correct base through complementary base pairing and bonding it onto the original strand. As DNA polymerases can only extend a DNA strand in a 5′ to 3′ direction, different mechanisms are used to copy the antiparallel strands of the double helix.98 In this way, the base on the old strand dictates which base appears on the new strand, and the cell ends up with a perfect copy of its DNA.
Naked extracellular DNA (eDNA), most of it release
d by cell death, is nearly ubiquitous in the environment. Its concentration in soil may be as high as 2 μg/L, and its concentration in natural aquatic environments may be as high at 88 μg/L.99 Various possible functions have been proposed for eDNA: it may be involved in horizontal gene transfer;100 it may provide nutrients;101 and it may act as a buffer to recruit or titrate ions or antibiotics.102 Extracellular DNA acts as a functional extracellular matrix component in the biofilms of several b
acterial species. It may act as a recognition factor to regulate the attachment and dispersal of specific cell types in the biofilm;103 it may contribute to biofilm formation;104 and it may contribute to the biofilm's physical strength and resistance to biological stress.105
Cell-free fetal DNA is found in the blood of the mother, and can be sequenced to determine a great deal of information about the developing fetus.106
Under the name of environmental DNA eDNA has seen increased use in the nat
ural sciences as a survey tool for ecology, monitoring the movements and presence of species in water, air, or on land, and assessing an area's biodiversity.107108
All the functions of DNA depend on interactions with proteins. These protein interactions can be non-specific, or the protein can bind specifically to a single DNA sequence. Enzymes can also bind to DNA and of these, the polymerases that copy the DNA base sequence in transcription and DNA replication are particularly important.
Struct
ural proteins that bind DNA are well-understood examples of non-specific DNA-protein interactions. Within chromosomes, DNA is held in complexes with structural proteins. These proteins organize the DNA into a compact structure called chromatin. In eukaryotes, this structure involves DNA binding to a complex of small basic proteins called histones, while in prokaryotes multiple types of proteins are involved.109110 The histones form a disk-shaped complex called a nucleosome, which contains two co
mplete turns of double-stranded DNA wrapped around its surface. These non-specific interactions are formed through basic residues in the histones, making ionic bonds to the acidic sugar-phosphate backbone of the DNA, and are thus largely independent of the base sequence.111 Chemical modifications of these basic amino acid residues include methylation, phosphorylation, and acetylation.112 These chemical changes alter the strength of the interaction between the DNA and the histones, making the DNA
 more or less accessible to transcription factors and changing the rate of transcription.113 Other non-specific DNA-binding proteins in chromatin include the high-mobility group proteins, which bind to bent or distorted DNA.114 These proteins are important in bending arrays of nucleosomes and arranging them into the larger structures that make up chromosomes.115
A distinct group of DNA-binding proteins is the DNA-binding proteins that specifically bind single-stranded DNA. In humans, replication
 protein A is the best-understood member of this family and is used in processes where the double helix is separated, including DNA replication, recombination, and DNA repair.116 These binding proteins seem to stabilize single-stranded DNA and protect it from forming stem-loops or being degraded by nucleases.
In contrast, other proteins have evolved to bind to particular DNA sequences. The most intensively studied of these are the various transcription factors, which are proteins that regulate t
ranscription. Each transcription factor binds to one particular set of DNA sequences and activates or inhibits the transcription of genes that have these sequences close to their promoters. The transcription factors do this in two ways. Firstly, they can bind the RNA polymerase responsible for transcription, either directly or through other mediator proteins; this locates the polymerase at the promoter and allows it to begin transcription.118 Alternatively, transcription factors can bind enzymes
 that modify the histones at the promoter. This changes the accessibility of the DNA template to the polymerase.119
As these DNA targets can occur throughout an organism's genome, changes in the activity of one type of transcription factor can affect thousands of genes.120 Consequently, these proteins are often the targets of the signal transduction processes that control responses to environmental changes or cellular differentiation and development. The specificity of these transcription factor
s' interactions with DNA come from the proteins making multiple contacts to the edges of the DNA bases, allowing them to "read" the DNA sequence. Most of these base-interactions are made in the major groove, where the bases are most accessible.25
Nucleases are enzymes that cut DNA strands by catalyzing the hydrolysis of the phosphodiester bonds. Nucleases that hydrolyse nucleotides from the ends of DNA strands are called exonucleases, while endonucleases cut within strands. The most frequently u
sed nucleases in molecular biology are the restriction endonucleases, which cut DNA at specific sequences. For instance, the EcoRV enzyme shown to the left recognizes the 6-base sequence 5′-GATATC-3′ and makes a cut at the horizontal line. In nature, these enzymes protect bacteria against phage infection by digesting the phage DNA when it enters the bacterial cell, acting as part of the restriction modification system.122 In technology, these sequence-specific nucleases are used in molecular clo
ning and DNA fingerprinting.
Enzymes called DNA ligases can rejoin cut or broken DNA strands.123 Ligases are particularly important in lagging strand DNA replication, as they join the short segments of DNA produced at the replication fork into a complete copy of the DNA template. They are also used in DNA repair and genetic recombination.123
Topoisomerases are enzymes with both nuclease and ligase activity. These proteins change the amount of supercoiling in DNA. Some of these enzymes work by cu
tting the DNA helix and allowing one section to rotate, thereby reducing its level of supercoiling; the enzyme then seals the DNA break.44 Other types of these enzymes are capable of cutting one DNA helix and then passing a second strand of DNA through this break, before rejoining the helix.124 Topoisomerases are required for many processes involving DNA, such as DNA replication and transcription.45
Helicases are proteins that are a type of molecular motor. They use the chemical energy in nucleo
side triphosphates, predominantly adenosine triphosphate (ATP), to break hydrogen bonds between bases and unwind the DNA double helix into single strands.125 These enzymes are essential for most processes where enzymes need to access the DNA bases.
Polymerases are enzymes that synthesize polynucleotide chains from nucleoside triphosphates. The sequence of their products is created based on existing polynucleotide chains—which are called templates. These enzymes function by repeatedly adding a nu
cleotide to the 3′ hydroxyl group at the end of the growing polynucleotide chain. As a consequence, all polymerases work in a 5′ to 3′ direction.126 In the active site of these enzymes, the incoming nucleoside triphosphate base-pairs to the template: this allows polymerases to accurately synthesize the complementary strand of their template. Polymerases are classified according to the type of template that they use.
In DNA replication, DNA-dependent DNA polymerases make copies of DNA polynucleot
ide chains. To preserve biological information, it is essential that the sequence of bases in each copy are precisely complementary to the sequence of bases in the template strand. Many DNA polymerases have a proofreading activity. Here, the polymerase recognizes the occasional mistakes in the synthesis reaction by the lack of base pairing between the mismatched nucleotides. If a mismatch is detected, a 3′ to 5′ exonuclease activity is activated and the incorrect base removed.127 In most organis
ms, DNA polymerases function in a large complex called the replisome that contains multiple accessory subunits, such as the DNA clamp or helicases.128
RNA-dependent DNA polymerases are a specialized class of polymerases that copy the sequence of an RNA strand into DNA. They include reverse transcriptase, which is a viral enzyme involved in the infection of cells by retroviruses, and telomerase, which is required for the replication of telomeres.63129 For example, HIV reverse transcriptase is an 
enzyme for AIDS virus replication.129 Telomerase is an unusual polymerase because it contains its own RNA template as part of its structure. It synthesizes telomeres at the ends of chromosomes. Telomeres prevent fusion of the ends of neighboring chromosomes and protect chromosome ends from damage.64
Transcription is carried out by a DNA-dependent RNA polymerase that copies the sequence of a DNA strand into RNA. To begin transcribing a gene, the RNA polymerase binds to a sequence of DNA called a 
promoter and separates the DNA strands. It then copies the gene sequence into a messenger RNA transcript until it reaches a region of DNA called the terminator, where it halts and detaches from the DNA. As with human DNA-dependent DNA polymerases, RNA polymerase II, the enzyme that transcribes most of the genes in the human genome, operates as part of a large protein complex with multiple regulatory and accessory subunits.130
A DNA helix usually does not interact with other segments of DNA, and 
in human cells, the different chromosomes even occupy separate areas in the nucleus called "chromosome territories".132 This physical separation of different chromosomes is important for the ability of DNA to function as a stable repository for information, as one of the few times chromosomes interact is in chromosomal crossover which occurs during sexual reproduction, when genetic recombination occurs. Chromosomal crossover is when two DNA helices break, swap a section and then rejoin.
Recombin
ation allows chromosomes to exchange genetic information and produces new combinations of genes, which increases the efficiency of natural selection and can be important in the rapid evolution of new proteins.133 Genetic recombination can also be involved in DNA repair, particularly in the cell's response to double-strand breaks.134
The most common form of chromosomal crossover is homologous recombination, where the two chromosomes involved share very similar sequences. Non-homologous recombinat
ion can be damaging to cells, as it can produce chromosomal translocations and genetic abnormalities. The recombination reaction is catalyzed by enzymes known as recombinases, such as RAD51.135 The first step in recombination is a double-stranded break caused by either an endonuclease or damage to the DNA.136 A series of steps catalyzed in part by the recombinase then leads to joining of the two helices by at least one Holliday junction, in which a segment of a single strand in each helix is ann
ealed to the complementary strand in the other helix. The Holliday junction is a tetrahedral junction structure that can be moved along the pair of chromosomes, swapping one strand for another. The recombination reaction is then halted by cleavage of the junction and re-ligation of the released DNA.137 Only strands of like polarity exchange DNA during recombination. There are two types of cleavage: east-west cleavage and north–south cleavage. The north–south cleavage nicks both strands of DNA, w
hile the east–west cleavage has one strand of DNA intact. The formation of a Holliday junction during recombination makes it possible for genetic diversity, genes to exchange on chromosomes, and expression of wild-type viral genomes.
DNA contains the genetic information that allows all forms of life to function, grow and reproduce. However, it is unclear how long in the 4-billion-year history of life DNA has performed this function, as it has been proposed that the earliest forms of life may hav
e used RNA as their genetic material.138139 RNA may have acted as the central part of early cell metabolism as it can both transmit genetic information and carry out catalysis as part of ribozymes.140 This ancient RNA world where nucleic acid would have been used for both catalysis and genetics may have influenced the evolution of the current genetic code based on four nucleotide bases. This would occur, since the number of different bases in such an organism is a trade-off between a small numbe
r of bases increasing replication accuracy and a large number of bases increasing the catalytic efficiency of ribozymes.141 However, there is no direct evidence of ancient genetic systems, as recovery of DNA from most fossils is impossible because DNA survives in the environment for less than one million years, and slowly degrades into short fragments in solution.142 Claims for older DNA have been made, most notably a report of the isolation of a viable bacterium from a salt crystal 250 million 
years old,143 but these claims are controversial.144145
Building blocks of DNA  may have been formed extraterrestrially in outer space.146147148 Complex DNA and RNA organic compounds of life, including uracil, cytosine, and thymine, have also been formed in the laboratory under conditions mimicking those found in outer space, using starting chemicals, such as pyrimidine, found in meteorites. Pyrimidine, like polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), the most carbon-rich chemical found in the univ
erse, may have been formed in red giants or in interstellar cosmic dust and gas clouds.149
Ancient DNA has been recovered from ancient organisms at a timescale where genome evolution can be directly observed, including from extinct organisms up to millions of years old, such as the woolly mammoth.150151
Methods have been developed to purify DNA from organisms, such as phenol-chloroform extraction, and to manipulate it in the laboratory, such as restriction digests and the polymerase chain reacti
on. Modern biology and biochemistry make intensive use of these techniques in recombinant DNA technology. Recombinant DNA is a man-made DNA sequence that has been assembled from other DNA sequences. They can be transformed into organisms in the form of plasmids or in the appropriate format, by using a viral vector.152 The genetically modified organisms produced can be used to produce products such as recombinant proteins, used in medical research,153 or be grown in agriculture.154155
Forensic sc
ientists can use DNA in blood, semen, skin, saliva or hair found at a crime scene to identify a matching DNA of an individual, such as a perpetrator.156 This process is formally termed DNA profiling, also called DNA fingerprinting. In DNA profiling, the lengths of variable sections of repetitive DNA, such as short tandem repeats and minisatellites, are compared between people. This method is usually an extremely reliable technique for identifying a matching DNA.157 However, identification can be
 complicated if the scene is contaminated with DNA from several people.158 DNA profiling was developed in 1984 by British geneticist Sir Alec Jeffreys,159 and first used in forensic science to convict Colin Pitchfork in the 1988 Enderby murders case.160
The development of forensic science and the ability to now obtain genetic matching on minute samples of blood, skin, saliva, or hair has led to re-examining many cases. Evidence can now be uncovered that was scientifically impossible at the time 
of the original examination. Combined with the removal of the double jeopardy law in some places, this can allow cases to be reopened where prior trials have failed to produce sufficient evidence to convince a jury. People charged with serious crimes may be required to provide a sample of DNA for matching purposes. The most obvious defense to DNA matches obtained forensically is to claim that cross-contamination of evidence has occurred. This has resulted in meticulous strict handling procedures
 with new cases of serious crime.
DNA profiling is also used successfully to positively identify victims of mass casualty incidents,161 bodies or body parts in serious accidents, and individual victims in mass war graves, via matching to family members.
DNA profiling is also used in DNA paternity testing to determine if someone is the biological parent or grandparent of a child with the probability of parentage is typically 99.99% when the alleged parent is biologically related to the child. Usu
ally DNA sequencing are carried out after birth, but there are new methods to test paternity while a mother is still pregnant.162
Deoxyribozymes, also called DNAzymes or catalytic DNA, were first discovered in 1994.163 They are mostly single stranded DNA sequences isolated from a large pool of random DNA sequences through a combinatorial approach called in vitro selection or systematic evolution of ligands by exponential enrichment (SELEX). DNAzymes catalyze variety of chemical reactions includi
ng RNA-DNA cleavage, RNA-DNA ligation, amino acids phosphorylation-dephosphorylation, carbon-carbon bond formation, etc. DNAzymes can enhance catalytic rate of chemical reactions up to 100,000,000,000-fold over the uncatalyzed reaction.164 The most extensively studied class of DNAzymes is RNA-cleaving types which have been used to detect different metal ions and designing therapeutic agents. Several metal-specific DNAzymes have been reported including the GR-5 DNAzyme (lead-specific),163 the CA1
-3 DNAzymes (copper-specific),165 the 39E DNAzyme (uranyl-specific) and the NaA43 DNAzyme (sodium-specific).166 The NaA43 DNAzyme, which is reported to be more than 10,000-fold selective for sodium over other metal ions, was used to make a real-time sodium sensor in cells.
Bioinformatics involves the development of techniques to store, data mine, search and manipulate biological data, including DNA nucleic acid sequence data. These have led to widely applied advances in computer science, especia
lly string searching algorithms, machine learning, and database theory.167 String searching or matching algorithms, which find an occurrence of a sequence of letters inside a larger sequence of letters, were developed to search for specific sequences of nucleotides.168 The DNA sequence may be aligned with other DNA sequences to identify homologous sequences and locate the specific mutations that make them distinct. These techniques, especially multiple sequence alignment, are used in studying ph
ylogenetic relationships and protein function.169 Data sets representing entire genomes' worth of DNA sequences, such as those produced by the Human Genome Project, are difficult to use without the annotations that identify the locations of genes and regulatory elements on each chromosome. Regions of DNA sequence that have the characteristic patterns associated with protein- or RNA-coding genes can be identified by gene finding algorithms, which allow researchers to predict the presence of parti
cular gene products and their possible functions in an organism even before they have been isolated experimentally.170 Entire genomes may also be compared, which can shed light on the evolutionary history of particular organism and permit the examination of complex evolutionary events.
DNA nanotechnology uses the unique molecular recognition properties of DNA and other nucleic acids to create self-assembling branched DNA complexes with useful properties.172 DNA is thus used as a structural mater
ial rather than as a carrier of biological information. This has led to the creation of two-dimensional periodic lattices  and three-dimensional structures in the shapes of polyhedra.173 Nanomechanical devices and algorithmic self-assembly have also been demonstrated,174 and these DNA structures have been used to template the arrangement of other molecules such as gold nanoparticles and streptavidin proteins.175 DNA and other nucleic acids are the basis of aptamers, synthetic oligonucleotide lig
ands for specific target molecules used in a range of biotechnology and biomedical applications.176
Because DNA collects mutations over time, which are then inherited, it contains historical information, and, by comparing DNA sequences, geneticists can infer the evolutionary history of organisms, their phylogeny.177 This field of phylogenetics is a powerful tool in evolutionary biology. If DNA sequences within a species are compared, population geneticists can learn the history of particular pop
ulations. This can be used in studies ranging from ecological genetics to anthropology.
DNA as a storage device for information has enormous potential since it has much higher storage density compared to electronic devices. However, high costs, slow read and write times (memory latency), and insufficient reliability has prevented its practical use.178179
DNA was first isolated by the Swiss physician Friedrich Miescher who, in 1869, discovered a microscopic substance in the pus of discarded surgi
cal bandages. As it resided in the nuclei of cells, he called it "nuclein".180181 In 1878, Albrecht Kossel isolated the non-protein component of "nuclein", nucleic acid, and later isolated its five primary nucleobases.182183
In 1909, Phoebus Levene identified the base, sugar, and phosphate nucleotide unit of RNA (then named "yeast nucleic acid").184185186 In 1929, Levene identified deoxyribose sugar in "thymus nucleic acid" (DNA).187 Levene suggested that DNA consisted of a string of four nucleo
tide units linked together through the phosphate groups ("Tetranucleotide hypothesis"). Levene thought the chain was short and the bases repeated in a fixed order. In 1927, Nikolai Koltsov proposed that inherited traits would be inherited via a "giant hereditary molecule" made up of "two mirror strands that would replicate in a semi-conservative fashion using each strand as a template".188189 In 1928, Frederick Griffith in his experiment discovered that traits of the "smooth" form of Pneumococcu
s could be transferred to the "rough" form of the same bacteria by mixing killed "smooth" bacteria with the live "rough" form.190191 This system provided the first clear suggestion that DNA carries genetic information.
In 1933, while studying virgin sea urchin eggs, Jean Brachet suggested that DNA is found in the cell nucleus and that RNA is present exclusively in the cytoplasm. At the time, "yeast nucleic acid" (RNA) was thought to occur only in plants, while "thymus nucleic acid" (DNA) only in
 animals. The latter was thought to be a tetramer, with the function of buffering cellular pH.192193 In 1937, William Astbury produced the first X-ray diffraction patterns that showed that DNA had a regular structure.194
In 1943, Oswald Avery, along with co-workers Colin MacLeod and Maclyn McCarty, identified DNA as the transforming principle, supporting Griffith's suggestion (Avery–MacLeod–McCarty experiment).195 Erwin Chargaff developed and published observations now known as Chargaff's rules,
 stating that in DNA from any species of any organism, the amount of guanine should be equal to cytosine and the amount of adenine should be equal to thymine.196197
By 1951, Alec Todd and collaborators at the University of Cambridge had determined by biochemical methods how the backbone of DNA is structured via the successive linking of carbon atoms 3 and 5 of the sugar to phosphates. This would help to corroborate Watson and Crick's later X-ray structural work.198 Todd would later be awarded th
e 1957 Nobel Prize in Chemistry for this and other discoveries related to DNA.199
Late in 1951, Francis Crick started working with James Watson at the Cavendish Laboratory within the University of Cambridge. DNA's role in heredity was confirmed in 1952 when Alfred Hershey and Martha Chase in the Hershey–Chase experiment showed that DNA is the genetic material of the enterobacteria phage T2.200
In May 1952, Raymond Gosling, a graduate student working under the supervision of Rosalind Franklin, to
ok an X-ray diffraction image, labeled as "Photo 51",201 at high hydration levels of DNA. This photo was given to Watson and Crick by Maurice Wilkins and was critical to their obtaining the correct structure of DNA. Franklin told Crick and Watson that the backbones had to be on the outside. Before then, Linus Pauling, and Watson and Crick, had erroneous models with the chains inside and the bases pointing outwards. Franklin's identification of the space group for DNA crystals proved her correct.
202 In February 1953, Linus Pauling and Robert Corey proposed a model for nucleic acids containing three intertwined chains, with the phosphates near the axis, and the bases on the outside.203 Watson and Crick completed their model, which is now accepted as the first correct model of the double helix of DNA. On 28 February 1953 Crick interrupted patrons' lunchtime at The Eagle pub in Cambridge, England to announce that he and Watson had "discovered the secret of life".204
The 25 April 1953 issue
 of the journal Nature published a series of five articles giving the Watson and Crick double-helix structure DNA and evidence supporting it.205 The structure was reported in a letter titled "MOLECULAR STRUCTURE OF NUCLEIC ACIDS A Structure for Deoxyribose Nucleic Acid", in which they said, "It has not escaped our notice that the specific pairing we have postulated immediately suggests a possible copying mechanism for the genetic material."9 This letter was followed by a letter from Franklin and
 Gosling, which was the first publication of their own X-ray diffraction data and of their original analysis method.48206 Then followed a letter by Wilkins and two of his colleagues, which contained an analysis of in vivo B-DNA X-ray patterns, and which supported the presence in vivo of the Watson and Crick structure.49
In April 2023, scientists, based on new evidence, concluded that Rosalind Franklin was a contributor and "equal player" in the discovery process of DNA, rather than otherwise, as
 may have been presented subsequently after the time of the discovery.207208209 In 1962, after Franklin's death, Watson, Crick, and Wilkins jointly received the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine.210 Nobel Prizes are awarded only to living recipients. A debate continues about who should receive credit for the discovery.211
In an influential presentation in 1957, Crick laid out the central dogma of molecular biology, which foretold the relationship between DNA, RNA, and proteins, and articulat
ed the "adaptor hypothesis".212 Final confirmation of the replication mechanism that was implied by the double-helical structure followed in 1958 through the Meselson–Stahl experiment.213 Further work by Crick and co-workers showed that the genetic code was based on non-overlapping triplets of bases, called codons, allowing Har Gobind Khorana, Robert W. Holley, and Marshall Warren Nirenberg to decipher the genetic code.214 These findings represent the birth of molecular biology.215
In 1986, DNA 
analysis was first used in a criminal investigation when police in the UK requested Alec Jeffreys of the University of Leicester to prove or disprove the involvement in a particular case of a suspect who claimed innocence in the matter. Although the suspect had already confessed to committing a recent rape-murder, he was denying any involvement in a similar crime committed three years earlier. Yet the details of the two cases were so alike that the police concluded both crimes had been committed
 by the same person. However, all charges against the suspect were dropped when Jeffreys' DNA testing exonerated the suspect — from both the earlier murder and the one to which he'd confessed. Further such DNA profiling led to positive identification of another suspect (Colin Pitchfork) who, in 1988, was found guilty of both rape-murders.216217

